Multiple Choice Questions
1.Which of the following is not a physical change?(a)Boiling of water to give water vapour
(b)Melting of ice to give water
(c)Dissolution of salt in water
(d)Combustion of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
2.The following reaction is an example of a4NH3(g) + 5O2(g)  4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)(i)displacement reaction
(ii)combination reaction(iii)redox reaction
(iv)neutralisation reaction
(a)(i) and (iv)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (iii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
3.Which of the following statements about the given reaction are correct?3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g)  Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)(i)Iron metal is getting oxidised
(ii)Water is getting reduced(iii)Water is acting as reducing agent
(iv)Water is acting as oxidising 
agent(a)(i), (ii) and (iii)(b)(iii) and (iv)
(c)(i), (ii) and (iv)(d)(ii) and (iv)
4.Which of the following are exothermic processes?(i)Reaction of water with quick lime
(ii)Dilution of an acid(iii)Evaporation of water
(iv)Sublimation of camphor (crystals)
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (iv)(d)(iii) and (iv)
Chemical Reactions
and Equations
1CHAPTER
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE25.Three beakers labelled as A, B and C each containing 25 mLof water were taken. A small amount of NaOH, anhydrous
CuSO4 and NaCl were added to the beakers A, B and Crespectively. It was observed that there was an increase inthe temperature of the solutions contained in beakers A andB, whereas in case of beaker C, the temperature of thesolution falls. Which one of the following statement(s) is(are)
correct?(i)In beakers A and B, exothermic process has occurred.
(ii)In 
beakers A and B, endothermic process has occurred.(iii)In beaker C exothermic process has occurred.
(iv)In beaker C endothermic process has occurred.
(a)(i) only(b)
(ii) only(c)(i) and (iv)(d)(ii) and (iii)
6.A dilute ferrous sulphate solution was gradually added to thebeaker containing acidified permanganate solution. The lightpurple colour of the solution fades and finally disappears.
Which of the following is the correct explanation for theobservation?(a)KMnO
4 is an oxidising agent, it oxidises  FeSO4(b)FeSO
4  acts as an oxidising agent and oxidises KMnO4(c)The colour disappears due to dilution; no reaction is involved
(d)KMnO
4 is an unstable compound and decomposes in presenceof FeSO4 to a colourless compound.7.Which among the following is(are) double displacement
reaction(s)?(i)Pb + CuCl
2  PbCl2 + Cu(ii)Na
2SO4 + BaCl2  BaSO4 + 2NaCl(iii)C + O
2  CO2(iv)CH
4 + 2O2  CO2 + 2H2O(a)(i) and (iv)(b)(ii) only
(c)(i) and (ii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
8.Which among the following statement(s) is(are) true? Exposure of
silver chloride  to sunlight for a long duration turns grey due to(i)the formation of silver by 
decomposition of silver chloride
(ii) 
sublimation of silver chloride(iii)decomposition of chlorine gas from silver chloride
(iv)oxidation of silver chloride
(a)(i) only(b)(i) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iii)(d)(iv) only

CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS39.Solid calcium oxide  reacts vigorously with water to form calciumhydroxide  accompanied by liberation of heat. This process is
called slaking of lime.  Calcium hydroxide dissolves in water toform its solution called lime water. Which among the following is(are) true about slaking of lime and the solution formed?(i)It is an endothermic reaction
(ii)It 
is an exothermic reaction(iii)The pH of the resulting solution will be more than seven
(iv)The pH of the resulting solution will be less than seven
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (iv)(d)(iii) and (iv)
10.Barium chloride on reacting with ammonium sulphate formsbarium sulphate and ammonium chloride. Which of the followingcorrectly represents the type of the reaction involved?(i)Displacement reaction
(ii)Precipitation reaction(iii)Combination reaction
(iv)Double displacement reaction
(a)(i) only(b)
(ii) only(c)(iv) only(d)(ii) and (iv)
11.Electrolysis of water is a decomposition reaction. The mole ratio ofhydrogen and oxygen gases liberated during electrolysis of water is(a)1:1
(b)2:1
(c)4:1
(d)1:2
12.Which of the following is(are) an endothermic process(es)?(i)Dilution of sulphuric acid
(ii)Sublimation of dry ice(iii)Condensation of water vapours
(iv)Evaporation of water
(a)(i) and (iii)
(b)(ii) only
(c)(iii) only(d)(ii) and (iv)
13.In the double displacement reaction between aqueous potassium
iodide and aqueous lead nitrate, a yellow precipitate of lead iodideis formed. While performing the activity if lead nitrate is notavailable, which of the following can be used in place of lead
nitrate?(a)Lead sulphate (insoluble)
(b)Lead acetate
(c)Ammonium nitrate
(d)Potassium sulphate

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE414.Which of the following gases can be used for storage of freshsample of an oil for a long time?(a)Carbon  dioxide or oxygen
(b)Nitrogen or oxygen
(c)Carbon dioxide or helium
(d)Helium or nitrogen
15.The following reaction is used for the preparation of oxygen gasin the laboratory2KClO3 (s) Heat
tCatalys

 2KCl (s) + 3O2 (g)Which of the following statement(s) is(are) correct about the
reaction?(a)It is a decomposition reaction and endothermic in nature
(b)It is a combination reaction
(c)It is a decomposition reaction and accompanied by release of
heat(d)It is a photochemical decomposition reaction and exothermic
in nature16.Which one of the following processes involve chemical reactions?(a)Storing of oxygen gas under pressure in a gas cylinder
(b)Liquefaction of air
(c)Keeping petrol in a china dish in the open
(d)Heating copper wire in presence of air at high temperature
17.In which of the following chemical equations, the abbreviationsrepresent the correct states of the reactants and products involvedat reaction temperature?(a)2H
2(l) + O2(l)  2H2O(g)(b)2H
2(g) + O2(l)  2H2O(l)(c)2H
2(g) + O2(g)  2H2O(l)(d)2H
2(g) + O2(g)  2H2O(g)18.Which of the following are combination reactions?(i)2KClO
3  Heat

 2KCl  + 3O2(ii)MgO + H2O  Mg(OH)2(iii)4Al + 3O
2    2Al2 O3(iv)Zn + FeSO
4    ZnSO4 + Fe(a)(i) and (iii)(b)(iii) and (iv)
(c)(ii) and (iv)(d)(ii) and (iii)

CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS5Short Answer Questions19.Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactionsand identify the type of reaction in each case.(a)Nitrogen gas is treated with hydrogen gas in the presence of a
catalyst at 773K to form ammonia gas.(b)Sodium hydroxide solution is treated with acetic acid to form
sodium acetate and water.(c)Ethanol is warmed with ethanoic acid to form ethyl acetate in
the presence of concentrated H2SO4 .(d)Ethene is burnt in the presence of oxygen to form carbon
dioxide, water and releases heat and light.20.Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions
and identify the type of reaction in each case.(a)Thermit reaction, iron (III) oxide reacts with aluminium and
gives molten iron and aluminium oxide.(b)Magnesium ribbon is burnt in an atmosphere of nitrogen gas
to form solid magnesium nitride.(c)Chlorine gas is passed in an aqueous potassium iodide
solution to form potassium chloride solution and solid iodine.(d)Ethanol is burnt in air to form carbon dioxide, water and
releases heat.21.Complete the missing components/variables given as x and y inthe following reactions(a)Pb(NO
3)2 (aq) + 2KI(aq)  PbI2 (x) + 2KNO3(y)(b)Cu(s) + 2Ag NO
3(aq)  Cu(NO3)2(aq) + x(s)(c)Zn(s) + H
2SO4(aq)  ZnSO4(x) + H2(y)(d)CaCO
3(s) x CaO(s) + CO2(g)22.Which among the following changes are exothermic orendothermic in nature?(a)Decomposition of ferrous sulphate
(b)Dilution of sulphuric acid
(c)Dissolution of sodium hydroxide in water
(d)Dissolution of ammonium chloride in water
23.Identify the reducing agent in the following reactions(a)4NH
3 + 5O2   4NO + 6H2O(b)H
2O + F2   HF  + HOF(c)Fe
2O3 + 3CO  2Fe + 3CO2(d)2H
2 + O2  2H2O
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE624.Identify the oxidising agent (oxidant) in the following reactions(a)Pb
3O4 + 8HCl  3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O(b)2Mg + O
2  2MgO(c)CuSO
4  + Zn  Cu + ZnSO4(d)V
2O5 + 5Ca  2V + 5CaO(e)3Fe + 4H
2O  Fe3O4 + 4H2(f)CuO + H
2   Cu + H2O25.Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactions(a)Sodium carbonate on reaction with hydrochloric acid in equal
molar concentrations gives sodium chloride and sodiumhydrogencarbonate.(b)Sodium hydrogencarbonate on reaction with hydrochloric acid
gives sodium chloride, water and liberates carbon dioxide.(c)Copper sulphate on treatment with potassium iodide
precipitates cuprous iodide (Cu2 I2), liberates iodine gas andalso forms potassium sulphate.26.A solution of potassium chloride when mixed with silver nitratesolution,  an insoluble white substance is formed. Write the chemicalreaction involved and also mention the type of the chemical reaction?27.Ferrous sulphate decomposes with the evolution of a gas having
a characteristic odour of burning sulphur. Write the chemicalreaction involved and identify the type of reaction.28.Why do fire flies glow at night?29.Grapes hanging on the plant do not ferment but after being
plucked from the plant can be fermented. Under what conditionsdo these grapes ferment? Is it a chemical or a physical change?30.Which among the following are physical or chemical changes?(a)Evaporation of petrol
(b)Burning of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
(c)Heating of an iron rod to red hot.
(d)Curdling of milk
(e)Sublimation of solid ammonium chloride
31.During the reaction of some metals with dilute hydrochloric acid,following observations were made.(a)Silver metal does not show any change
(b)The temperature of the reaction mixture rises when aluminium
(Al) is added.(c)The reaction of sodium metal is found to be highly explosive
(d)Some bubbles of a gas are seen when lead (Pb) is reacted with
the acid.
Explain these observations giving suitable reasons.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS AND EQUATIONS732.A substance  X, which is an oxide of a group 2 element, is used
intensively in the cement industry. This element is present in bonesalso. On treatment with water it forms a solution which turns redlitmus blue. Identify X and also write the chemical reactions involved.
33.Write a balanced chemical equation for each of the following
reactions and also classify them.(a)Lead acetate solution is treated with dilute hydrochloric acid
to form lead chloride and acetic acid solution.(b)A piece of sodium metal is added to absolute ethanol to form
sodium ethoxide and hydrogen gas.(c)Iron (III) oxide on heating  with carbon monoxide gas reacts
to form solid iron and liberates carbon dioxide gas.(d)Hydrogen sulphide gas reacts with oxygen gas to form solid
sulphur and liquid water.34.Why do we store silver chloride in dark coloured bottles?35.Balance the following chemical equations and identify the type ofchemical reaction.(a)Mg(s) + Cl
2(g)  MgCl2(s)(b)HgO(s) 
Heat

 Hg(l) + O2(g)(c)Na(s) + S(s) 
use
F
 Na2S(s)(d)TiCl
4(l) + Mg(s)  Ti(s) + MgCl2(s)(e)CaO(s) + SiO
2(s)  CaSiO3(s)(f)H
2O2(l)U V
 H2O(l) + O2(g)36.A magnesium ribbon is burnt in oxygen to give a white compoundX accompanied by emission of light. If the burning ribbon is nowplaced in an atmosphere of nitrogen, it continues to burn andforms a compound Y.(a)Write the chemical formulae of X and Y.
(b)Write a balanced chemical equation, when X is dissolved in
water.37.Zinc liberates hydrogen gas when reacted with dilute hydrochloricacid, whereas copper does not. Explain why?38.A silver article generally turns black when kept in the open for a fewdays. The article when rubbed with toothpaste again starts shining.(a)Why do silver articles turn black when kept in the open for a
few days? Name the phenomenon involved.(b)Name the black substance formed and give its chemical
formula.
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE8Long Answer Questions39.On heating blue coloured powder of copper (II) nitrate in a boilingtube, copper oxide (black), oxygen gas and a brown gas X is formed(a)Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction.
(b)Identity the brown gas X evolved.
(c)Identity the type of reaction.
(d)What could be the pH range of aqueous solution of the gas X?
40.Give the characteristic tests for the following gases(a)CO
2(b)SO
2(c)O
2(d)H
241.What happens when a piece of
(a)zinc metal is added to copper sulphate solution?
(b)aluminium metal is added to dilute hydrochloric acid?
(c)silver metal is added to copper sulphate solution?
Also, write the balanced chemical equation if the reactionoccurs42.What happens when zinc granules are treated with dilute solutionof H2SO4, HCl, HNO3, NaCl and NaOH, also write the chemicalequations if reaction occurs.43.On adding a drop of barium chloride solution to an aqueoussolution of sodium sulphite, white precipitate is obtained.(a)Write a balanced chemical equation of the reaction involved
(b)What other name can be given to this precipitation reaction?
(c)On adding dilute hydrochloric acid to the reaction mixture,
white precipitate disappears. Why?44.You are provided with two containers made up of copper andaluminium. You are also provided with solutions of dilute HCl,
dilute HNO3, ZnCl2 and H2O. In which of the above containersthese solutions can be kept?
