SCIENCECLASS X (THEORY)SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-ITime :  3 Hours                                             Maximum Marks : 75Multiple Choice Questions1.Solid calcium oxide  reacts vigorously with water to form calciumhydroxide accompanied by liberation of heat. This process is calledslaking of lime. Which among the following is (are) true aboutslaking of lime?(i)It is an endothermic reaction
(ii)It 
is an exothermic reaction(iii)The pH of the resulting solution will be more than seven
(iv)The pH of the resulting solution will be less than seven
(a)(i) and (ii)
(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (iv)
(d)(iii) and (iv)(1)
2.Sodium carbonate is a basic salt because it is a salt of(a)strong acid and strong base
(b)weak acid and weak base
(c)weak base and strong acid
(d)strong base and weak acid(1)
3.Which one of the following four metals would be displaced fromthe solution of its salt by other three metals?(a)Mg
(b)Ag
(c)Zn
(d)Cu(1)
4.Which one among the following is the correct representation ofelectron dot structure of nitrogen(a)NN(b)NN(c)NN(d)NN(1)
5.The correct sequence of anaerobic reactions in yeast is(a)Glucose 

cytoplasm
Pyruvate 
mitochondria
 Ethanol +Carbondioxide(b)Glucose 

cytoplasm
  Pyruvate   
cytoplasm
       Lactic acid(c)Glucose 

cytoplasm
  Pyruvate   
mitochondria
  Lactic acid(d)Glucose 

cytoplasm
 Pyruvate   
cytoplasm
  Ethanol +Carbondioxide(1)6.Offspring formed as a result of sexual reproduction exhibit morevariations because(a)sexual reproduction is a lengthy process
(b)genetic material comes from two parents of the same species
(c)genetic material comes from two parents of different species
(d)genetic material comes from many parents(1)
7.New species may be formed if(i)DNA undergoes significant changes in germ cells
(ii)chromosome number changes in the gamete(iii)chromosome number remains the same
(iv)mating does not take place
(a)(i) and (ii)
(b)(i) and (iii)
(c)(ii), (iii) and (iv)
(d)(i), (ii) and (iv)(1)
8.Beams of light are incident through the holes  A and B  and emergeout of the box through the holes C and D respectively as shown in
the Figure. Which of the following could be inside the box?(a)a rectangular glass slab
(b)a convex lens
(c)a concave lens
(d)a glass prism      (1)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I181
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE1829.The clear sky appears blue because(a)blue light gets absorbed in the atmosphere.
(b)ultraviolet radiations are absorbed in the atmosphere.
(c)violet and blue lights get scattered more than all other colours
by the atmosphere.(d)light of all other colours is scattered more than the violet and
blue colour lights by the atmosphere.(1)
10.Identify the given circuit in which the electrical components havebeen properly connected.(a)(i)
(b)(ii)
(c)(iii)
(d)(iv)(1)
11.The resistance between A and B in the given Figure will be
(a)20 
(b)30 
(c)90 
(d)more than 10 
but less than 20       (1)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I18312.In the arrangement shown in given Figure,  there are two coilswound on a non-conducting cylindrical rod. Initially
the key is not inserted. Then the key is inserted andlater removed. Then(a)the deflection in the galvanometer remains zero
throughout(b)there is a momentary deflection in the
galvanometer but it dies out shortly and there isno effect when the key is removed(c)there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in the same direction(d)there are momentary galvanometer deflections that die out
shortly; the deflections are in opposite directions(1)
13.A constant current flows in a horizontal wire in the plane of thepaper from east to west as shown in the given Figure. The directionof magnetic field at a point will be North to South(a)directly above the wire
(b)directly below the wire
(c)at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the north side
of the wire(d)at a point located in the plane of the paper, on the south side
of the wire(1)
14.The major problem in harnessing nuclear energy is how to(a)split nuclei
(b)sustain the reaction
(c)dispose off spent fuel safely
(d)convert nuclear energy into electrical energy(1)
15.
Which of the statements is incorrect?(a)All green plants and blue green algae are producers
(b)Green plants get their food from organic compounds
(c)Producers prepare their own food from inorganic compounds
(d)Plants convert solar energy into chemical energy(1)
Short Answer Questions16.Write the balanced chemical equations for the following reactionsand identify the type of reaction in each case(a)Nitrogen gas is treated with hydrogen gas in the presence of a
catalyst at 773K to form ammonia gas.(b)Limestone is heated strongly to form quicklime and
carbondioxide gas is evolved(1+1=2)
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE18417.Salt A commonly used in bakery products on heating convertsinto another salt B which is used in the manufacture of glass
and a gas C is evolved. The gas C when passed through limewater, turns it milky.  Identify A, B and C. Write the reaction forheating of salt A.(˜ + ˜ + ˜ + ˜ = 2)
18.Properties of the elements are given below. Where would you locatethe following elements in the Periodic Table?(a)A soft metal stored under kerosene
(b)An element with variable (more than one) valency stored under
water.(1+1=2)19.Why is ‚nutrition™ a necessity for an organism?(2)
20.Why is the flow of signals in a synapse from axonal end of oneneuron to dendritic end of another neuron but not the reverse?(2)21.In human beings, the statistical probability of getting either amale or female child is 50 : 50. Give a suitable explanation.(2)
22.Sudha finds out that the sharp image of the window pane of herscience laboratory is formed at a distance of  15 cm from thelens. She now tries to focus the building visible to her outside thewindow instead of the window pane without disturbing the lens.In which direction will  she move the screen to obtain a sharpimage of the building? What is the approximate focal length ofthis lens? (1+1=2)23.A student sitting at the back of the classroom cannot read clearly
the letters written on the blackboard. What advice will a doctorgive to her? Draw ray diagram for the correction of this defect.(1 + 1 =2)24.How will you use two identical prisms so that a ray of white light
incident on one prism emerges out of the second prism as whitelight? Draw the diagram.(2)
25.Three 60 W incandescent bulbs are connected in a parallel.(a)Calculate the total power consumed.
(b)Now suppose that one of the bulbs is fused. What will be the
total power consumed now?(1 + 1 =2)
26.A magnetic compass shows a deflection when placed near a
current carrying wire. How will the deflection of the compass get
affected if the current in the wire is increased? Support youranswer with a reason.(2)

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I18527.What is the difference between the direct and alternating currents?How many times does AC used in India change direction in one
second?(1+1=2)
28.What steps would you suggest to minimise environmentalpollution caused by burning of fossil fuels?(2)
29.List the common food chain of a pond ecosystem(2)
30.List two advantages associated with water harvesting at thecommunity level.(2)
Long Answer Questions31.Explain the following(a)The reactivity of a piece of aluminium metal decreases if it is
dipped in HNO3(b)Carbon cannot reduce the oxides of  Na or Mg
(c)NaCl does not conduct electricity in solid state whereas it
does conduct electricity in aqueous solution as well as inmolten state(d)Necessity of galvanisation of iron articles
(e)Metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg are never found in their free
state in nature.(1+1+1+1+1= 5)
orGiven below are the steps for extraction of copper from its ore.(a)Write the equations of the reactions involved in roasting of
copper (I) sulphide followed by its reduction.(b)Draw a neat labelled diagram for electrolytic refining(3 + 2 = 5)
32.You are given the balls and sticks models of six carbon atoms andfourteen hydrogen atoms and sufficient number of sticks. In howmany ways one can join the models of six carbon atoms and fourteen
hydrogen atoms to form different molecules of C6H14.(5)
orDraw structural formulae of all the possible isomers of thecompound with molecular formula C3H6O and also give theirelectron dot structures.(2 + 3 = 5)
33.Distinguish between pollination and fertilisation. Mention the site
and product of fertilisation in a flower. Draw a neat, labelleddiagram of a pistil showing pollen tube growth and its entry intothe ovule.(1˜+1˜+2=5)
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE186orReproduction is essentially a phenomenon that is not for survivalof an individual but for continuation of a species. Justify(5)
34.(a)Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a convex
lens when an object is placed(i)  at twice the focal length of the lens(ii) at infinity(b)The image of a candle flame formed by a lens is obtained on a
screen placed on the other side of the lens. If the image isthree times the size of the flame and the distance betweenlens and image is 80 cm, at what distance has the candlebeen placed from the lens? What is the nature of the image
and the lens?(1 + 1 + 3 = 5)
orWrite laws of refraction of 
light. 
Explain the same with the helpof ray diagram, when a ray of light passes through a rectangular
glass slab(2 + 3 = 5)
35.How will you infer with the help of an experiment that the samecurrent flows through every part of the circuit containing threeresistances in series connected to a battery?(5)
or         Find out 
the following in the electric circuit given in the Figure.(a)Effective resistance of two 8 
 resistors in combination.(b)Current flowing through 4 
 resistor.(c)Potential difference across 4 
 resistor.(d)Power dissipated by 4 
 resistor.(e)Difference in ammeter readings, if any.(1+1+1+1+1= 5)
36.In the context of conservation of natural resources, explain theterms reduce, recycle and reuse. From among the materials thatwe use in daily life, identify two materials for each category.(5)orSuggest a few useful ways of utilising waste water.(5)

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I187ANSWERSANSWERSANSWERSANSWERSANSWERSMultiple Choice Questions1.(b)2.(d)3.(b)4.(d)5.(d)6.(b)7.(a)8.(a)9.(c)10.(b)11.(d )12.(d)13.(b)14.(c)15.(b)Short Answer Questions16.
(a) N2(g) + 3H2(g) catalyst
773 K

 2NH3(g)Combination  reaction(b) CaCO3 (s) Heat

 CaO (s) + CO2 (g)Decomposition  reaction17.The salt A which is commonly used in bakery product is bakingpowder (NaHCO3). On heating it forms B sodium carbonate(Na2CO3) and CO2 gas C is evolved. When CO2 (g) is passed throughlime water, it forms calcium carbonate (CaCO3),  which is sparinglysoluble in water making it milky.2NaHCO3Heat

 Na2CO3 + H2O + CO218.(a)  Sodium (Na) Group 1 and Period 3(b)Phosphorus (P) Group 15 and Period 3

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE18819.Food is required for the following purposes.(a)It provides energy for the various metabolic processes in the
body.(b) It is essential for the growth of new cells and the repair or
replacement of worn out cells.(c)It is needed to develop resistance against various diseases.
20.When an electrical signal reaches the axonal end of a neuron, itreleases a chemical substance. This chemical diffuses towardsthe dendrite end of next neuron where it generates an electricalimpulse or signal. Hence, the electrical signal is converted into achemical signal at the axonal end. Since these chemicals areabsent at the dendrite end of the neuron, the electrical signal
cannot be converted into chemical signal.21.The sex of an infant is determined by the type of sex chromosome
contributed by the male gamete. Since the ratio of male gametescontaining X chromosome and those containing Y chromosomeis 50 : 50, the statistical possibility of male or a female infant is
also 50 : 50.22.Sudha should move the screen towards the lens so as to obtain a
clearer image of the building. The approximate focal length of thislens will be 15 cm.23.The student is suffering from myopia (Short sightedness). Doctoradvises her to use a concave lens of appropriate power to correctthis defect.24.HintŠ
 By using two identical prisms, one placed inverted withrespect to the other. 
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I18925.HintŠ
 (a) 60 W  3 = 180 W. Since wattage in parallel combinationbecomes three times the wattage of a single bulb.(b)120 W
26.The deflection increases. The strength of magnetic field is directlyproportional to the magnitude of current passing through thestraight conductor.27.Direct current always flows in one direction but the alternatingcurrent reverses its direction periodically. The frequency of AC inIndia is 50 Hz and in each cycle it alters direction twice. ThereforeAC changes direction 2  50 = 100 times in one second.28.(a)  Use of alternative source of energy like solar and wind energy(b)Use of catalytic converters in vehicles
(c)Use of refined fuels like CNG
(d)Proper servicing of vehicles
29.Phytoplanktons and aquatic plants  small aquatic animals(insects, larvae etc.)   fish  bird.30.HintŠ
 (a)  The ground water level increases due to recharging of wells.(b)Ground water keeps the layers of soil above it moist and
prevents loss of water by evaporation.(c)The water can be stored during rainy season and can be used
when required.Long Answer  Questions31.HintŠ
 (a)  Due to the formation of a layer of oxide that is, Al2O3(b)Na or Mg are more reactive metals as compared to carbon
(c)In solid state the movement of NaCl ions is not possible due
to its rigid structure. In molten state, the ions can move freelyas the forces of attraction between oppositely charged ions
are overcome due to heat. Also, in aqueous solution, the ionsare free to move.(d)To protect iron from rusting
(e)They are highly reactive
or(a)2Cu
2 S (s) + 3O2 (s) Heat
 2 Cu2 O(s) + 2SO2 (g)     2Cu2 O + Cu2 S Heat
 6 Cu(s) + SO2 (g)(b) Diagram for electrolytic refining
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE19032.C6 H14(a)CH
3 Š CH2 Š CH2 Š CH2 Š CH2 Š CH3(b)CH
3 ŠCHCH3 Š CH2 Š CH2 Š CH3(c)CH
3 ŠCH2 ŠCHCH3Š CH2 Š CH3(d)CH
3 Š CHCH3 Š CHCH3 Š CH3(e)CH3CCH3CH2CH3CH3orCH3CH3OC     PropanoneCH3ŠCH2ŠCHOPropanal33.The process or mechanism of transfer of pollen grains from theanther to the stigma is termed pollination.The fusion of male and female gametes giving rise to zygote istermed fertilisation.The site of fertilisation is ovule.The product of fertilisation is zygote.HintŠ
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I191orHintŠ(a)For survival an individual needs energy which it obtains from
life processes such as nutrition and respiration.(b)Reproduction does not provide energy.
(c)Reproduction ensures transfer of genetic material from one
generation to the next which helps in continuation of species.34.(a)(b) HintŠvmu = ŒŒ3
, using vuf111
Œ calculate u.u80.3 cmImage is real and inverted. The lens is convex.orGive the laws of refraction(i)                                   (ii)

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE19235. HintŠ Explain with the help of the diagramEi1NFAN'r1Glass
BAir
i2CO'MLGM'r2HPDAir
Glass
slab
OorDescribe the experiment showingthat same current flows through
each component in a series circuit(a)  1 A.(b)4  
(c)4 V.
(d)4 W.
(e)No difference. (Same current
flows through each element ina series circuit)AII+Œ+V1V2V3XPQS
YTR1R2R3+Œ+Œ+ŒŒK36.Reduce
 means to use a material/commodity in lesser quantity,e.g electricity and water.Recycle means a material that is used once is collected and sentback to a manufacturer so that they can make some other usefulmaterial from it.
e.g., plastic cups and buckets, glass tumbler, paper, metal objects.Reuse means using a thing over and over again instead of throwingit away. It does not involve the process of recycling either in smallor large scale: e.g., used envelopes, plastic carry bags, bottles ofjam.
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-I193orHintŠ The waste water can be used for(a)recharging the ground water
(b)irrigation purpose
(c)municipal water can be treated and used for washing cars,
watering the garden and other domestic uses.(c)pollutants in sewage water can become fertilisers for various
crops.
