Multiple Choice Questions
1.Which of the following property is generally not shown by metals?(a)Electrical conduction
(b)Sonorous in nature
(c)Dullness
(d)Ductility
2.The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wire is known as(a)ductility
(b)malleability
(c)sonorousity
(d)conductivity
3.Aluminium is used for making cooking utensils. Which of thefollowing properties of aluminium are responsible for the same?(i)Good thermal conductivity
(ii)Good electrical conductivity(iii)Ductility(iv)High melting point(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(i) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iii)
(d)(i) and (iv)
4.Which one of the following metals do not react with cold as well ashot water?(a)Na
(b)Ca
(c)Mg
(d)Fe
Metals and Non-metals3CHAPTER
5.Which of the following oxide(s) of iron would be obtained onprolonged reaction of iron with steam?(a)FeO
(b)Fe
2O3(c)Fe
3O4(d)Fe
2O3 and Fe3O46. What happens when calcium is treated with water?(i)It does not react with water
(ii)It 
reacts violently with water(iii)It 
reacts less violently with water(iv)Bubbles of hydrogen gas formed stick to the surface of calcium(a)(i) and (iv)
(b)(ii) 
and (iii)(c)(i) and (ii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
7.Generally metals react with acids to give salt and hydrogen gas.
Which of the following acids does not give hydrogen gas on reactingwith metals (except Mn and Mg)?(a)H
2SO4(b)HCl
(c)HNO
3(d)All of these
8.The composition of aqua-regia is(a)Dil.HCl:
Conc. HNO33:1
(b)Conc.HCl:
Dil. HNO33:1
(c)Conc.HCl:
Conc.HNO33:1
(d)Dil.HCl:Dil.HNO
33:1
9.Which of the following are not ionic compounds?(i)KCl
(ii)HCl
(iii)CCl
4(iv)NaCl
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(iii) and (iv)(d)(i) and (iii)
METALS AND NON-METALS19
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE2010.Which one of the following properties is not generally exhibited byionic compounds?(a)Solubility in water
(b)Electrical conductivity in solid state
(c)High melting  and boiling points
(d)Electrical conductivity in molten state
11.Which of the following metals exist in their native state in nature?(i)Cu
(ii)Au
(iii)Zn
(iv)Ag
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iv)(d)(iii) and (iv)
12.Metals are refined by using different methods. Which of thefollowing metals are refined by electrolytic refining?(i)Au
(ii)Cu
(iii)Na
(iv)K
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(i) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
13.Silver articles become black on prolonged exposure to air. This is
due to the formation of(a)Ag
3N(b)Ag
2O(c)Ag
2S(d)Ag
2S and Ag3N14.Galvanisation is a method of protecting iron from rusting by coatingwith a thin layer of(a)Gallium
(b)Aluminium
(c)Zinc
(d)Silver
15.Stainless steel is very useful material for our life. In stainless steel,iron is mixed with(a)Ni and Cr
(b)Cu and Cr
(c)Ni and Cu
(d)Cu and Au

METALS AND NON-METALS2116.If copper is kept open in air, it slowly loses its shining brown surfaceand gains a green coating. It is due to the formation of(a)CuSO
4(b)CuCO
3(c)Cu(NO
3)2(d)CuO
17.Generally, metals are solid in nature. Which one of the followingmetals is found in liquid state at room temperature?(a)Na
(b)Fe
(c)Cr
(d)Hg
18.Which of the following metals are obtained by electrolysis of theirchlorides in molten state ?(i)Na
(ii)Ca
(iii)Fe
(iv)Cu
(a)(i) and (iv)(b)(iii) and (iv)
(c)(i) and (iii)(d)(i) and (ii)
19.Generally, non-metals are not lustrous. Which of the following non-metal is lustrous?(a)Sulphur
(b)Oxygen
(c)Nitrogen
(d)Iodine
 20.Which one of the following four metals would be displaced fromthe solution of its salts by other three metals?(a)Mg
(b)Ag
(c)Zn
(d)Cu
21.2 mL each of concentrated HCl, HNO3 and a mixture of concentratedHCl and concentrated HNO3  in the ratio of 3 : 1 were taken in testtubes labelled as A, B and C. A small piece of metal was put ineach test tube. No change occurred in test tubes A and B but themetal got dissolved in test tube C respectively. The metal could be(a)Al
(b)Au
(c)Cu
(d)Pt

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE2222.An alloy is(a)an element
(b)a compound
(c)a homogeneous mixture
(d)a heterogeneous mixture
23.An electrolytic cell consists of(i)positively charged cathode
(ii)negatively charged anode(iii)positively charged anode(iv)negatively charged cathode(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(iii) and (iv)
(c)(i) and (iii)(d)(ii) ad (iv)
24.During electrolytic refining of zinc, it gets(a)deposited on cathode

(b)deposited on anode
(c)deposited on cathode as well as anode
(d)remains in the solution
25.An element A is soft and can be cut with a knife. This is veryreactive to air and cannot be kept open in air. It reacts vigorouslywith water. Identify the element from the following(a)Mg
(b)Na
(c)P
(d)Ca
26.Alloys are homogeneous mixtures of a metal with a metal  or non-metal. Which among the following alloys contain non-metal as oneof its constituents?(a)Brass
(b)Bronze
(c)Amalgam
(d)Steel
27.Which among the following statements is incorrect for magnesiummetal?(a)It burns in oxygen with a dazzling white flame
(b)It reacts with cold water to form magnesium oxide and evolves
hydrogen gas(c)It reacts with hot water to form magnesium hydroxide and
evolves hydrogen gas(d)It reacts with steam to form magnesium hydroxide and evolves
hydrogen gas
METALS AND NON-METALS2328.Which among the following alloys contain mercury as one of itsconstituents?(a)Stainless steel
(b)Alnico
(c)Solder
(d)Zinc amalgam
29.Reaction between X and Y, forms compound Z. X loses electron
and Y gains electron. Which of the following properties is notshown by Z?(a)Has high melting point
(b)Has low melting point
(c)Conducts electricity in molten state
(d)Occurs as solid
30.The electronic configurations of three elements X, Y and Z are X  Š 2, 8;  Y Š 2, 8, 7 and Z Š 2, 8, 2. Which of the following iscorrect?(a)X is a metal
(b)Y is a metal
(c)Z is a non-metal
(d)Y is a non-metal and Z is a metal
31.Although metals form basic oxides, which of the following metalsform an amphoteric oxide?(a)Na
(b)Ca
(c)Al
(d)Cu
32.Generally, non-metals are not conductors of electricity. Which of
the following is a good conductor of electricity?(a)Diamond
(b)Graphite
(c)Sulphur
(d)Fullerene
33.Electrical wires have a coating of an insulting material. Thematerial, generally used is(a)Sulphur
(b)Graphite
(c)PVC
(d)All can be used

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE2434.Which of the following non-metals is a liquid?(a)Carbon
(b)Bromine
(c)Phosphorus
(d)Sulphur
35.Which of the following can undergo a chemical reaction?(a)MgSO
4 + Fe(b)ZnSO
4 + Fe(c)MgSO
4 + Pb(d)CuSO
4 + Fe36.Which one of the following figures correctly describes the processof electrolytic refining?     (a)          (b)
Short Answer Questions37.Iqbal treated a lustrous, divalent element M with sodiumhydroxide. He observed the formation of bubbles in reactionmixture. He made the same observations when this element was
treated with hydrochloric acid. Suggest how can he identify theproduced gas. Write chemical equations for both the reactions.38.During extraction of metals, electolytic refining is used to obtainpure metals. (a) Which material will be used as anode and cathodefor refining of silver metal by this process? (b) Suggest a suitable
electrolyte also. (c) In this electrolytic cell, where do we get puresilver after passing electric current?     (c) (d)
Fig. 3.1
METALS AND NON-METALS2539.Why should the metal sulphides and carbonates be converted tometal oxides in the process of extraction of metal from them?40.Generally, when metals are treated with mineral acids, hydrogengas is liberated but when metals (except Mn and Mg), treated withHNO3, hydrogen is not liberated, why?41.Compound X and aluminium are used to join railway tracks. (a)
Identify the compound X (b) Name the reaction  (c) Write down its
reaction.42.When a metal X is treated with cold water, it gives a basic salt Ywith molecular formula XOH (Molecular mass = 40) and liberatesa gas Z which easily catches fire. Identify X, Y and Z and also write
the reaction involved.43.A non-metal X exists in two different forms Y and Z. Y is the hardestnatural substance, whereas Z is a good conductor of electricity.Identify X, Y and Z.44.The following reaction takes place when aluminium powder is
heated with MnO23 MnO2 (s) + 4 Al (s)   3 Mn (l) + 2 Al2O3 (l) + Heat(a) Is aluminium getting reduced? (b) Is MnO2 getting oxidised?45.What are the constituents of solder alloy? Which property of soldermakes it suitable for welding electrical wires?46.A metal A, which is used in thermite process, when heated withoxygen gives an oxide B, which is amphoteric in nature. Identify Aand B. Write down the reactions of oxide B with HCl and NaOH.47.A metal that exists as a liquid at room temperature is obtained byheating its sulphide in the presence of air. Identify the metal andits ore and give the reaction involved.48.Give the formulae of the stable binary compounds that would beformed by the combination of following pairs of elements.(a)Mg and N
2(b)Li and O
2(c)Al and Cl
2(d)K and O
249.What happens when(a)ZnCO
3 is heated in the absence of oxygen?(b)a mixture of Cu
2O and Cu2S is heated?
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE2650.A non-metal A is an important constituent of our food and forms twooxides B and C. Oxide B is toxic whereas C causes global warming(a)Identify A, B and C
(b)To which Group of Periodic Table does A belong?
51.Give two examples each of the metals that are good conductorsand poor conductors of heat respectively.52.Name one metal and one non-metal that exist in liquid state atroom temperature. Also name two metals having melting pointless than 310 K (37°C)53.An element A reacts with water to form a compound B which isused in white washing. The compound B on heating forms anoxide C which on treatment with water gives back B. Identify A, B
and C and give the reactions involved.54.An alkali metal A gives a compound B (molecular mass = 40) on
reacting with water. The compound B gives a soluble compoundC on treatment with aluminium oxide.  Identify A, B and C andgive the reaction involved.55.Give the reaction involved during extraction of zinc  from itsore by(a)roasting of zinc ore
(b)calcination of zinc ore
56.A metal M does not liberate hydrogen from acids but reacts withoxygen to give a black colour product. Identify M and blackcoloured product and also explain the reaction of M with oxygen.57.An element forms an oxide A2O3 which is acidic in nature. IdentifyA as a metal or non-metal.58.A solution of CuSO4 was kept in an iron pot. After few days the ironpot was found to have a number of holes in it. Explain the reason interms of reactivity. Write the equation of the reaction involved.Long Answer Questions59.A non-metal A which is the largest constituent of air, when heatedwith H2 in 1:3 ratio in the presence of catalyst (Fe) gives a gas B.On heating  with O2 it gives an oxide C. If this oxide is passed intowater in the presence of air it gives an acid D which acts as astrong oxidising agent.(a)Identify A, B, C and D
(b)To which group of periodic table does this non-metal belong?

METALS AND NON-METALS2760.Give the steps involved in the extraction of metals of low andmedium reactivity from their respective sulphide ores.61.Explain the following(a)Reactivity of Al decreases if it is dipped in HNO
3(b)Carbon cannot reduce the oxides of  Na or Mg
(c)NaCl is not  a conductor of electricity in solid state whereas it
does conduct electricity in aqueous solution as well as inmolten state(d)Iron articles are galvanised.
(e)Metals like Na, K, Ca and Mg are never found in their free state
in nature.62.(i) Given below are the steps for extraction of copper from its ore.Write the reaction involved.(a)Roasting of copper (1) sulphide
(b)Reduction of copper (1) oxide with copper (1) sulphide.
(c)Electrolytic refining
(ii)Draw a neat  and well labelled diagram for electrolytic refining
of copper63.Of the three metals X, Y and Z.  X reacts with cold water, Y with hot

water and Z with steam only. Identify X, Y and Z and also arrange
them in order of increasing reactivity.64.An element A burns with golden flame in air. It reacts with anotherelement B, atomic number 17 to give a product C. An aqueoussolution of product C on electrolysis gives a compound D  andliberates hydrogen. Identify A, B, C and D. Also write down theequations for the reactions involved.65.Two ores A and B were taken. On heating ore A gives CO2 whereas,ore B gives SO2. What steps will you take to convert them intometals?
