SCIENCECLASS X (THEORY)SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-IITime :  3 Hours                                             Maximum Marks : 75Multiple Choice Questions1.Which among the following statement(s) is(are) true? Silverchloride on exposure to sunlight for long duration turns greydue to(i)the formation of silver by decomposition of silver chloride
(ii) 
sublimation of silver chloride(iii)decomposition of chlorine gas from silver chloride
(iv)oxidation of silver chloride
(a)(i) only
(b)(i) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iii)
(d)(iv) only(1)
2.Which of the following oxide(s) of iron would be obtained onprolonged reaction of iron with steam?(a)FeO
(b)Fe
2O3(c)Fe
3O4(d)Fe
2O3 and Fe3O4(1)3.CH3 CH2 OH  4AlkalineKMnO+Heat

 CH3 COOHIn the above given reaction, alkaline KMnO4 acts as(a)reducing agent
(b)oxidising agent
(c)reducing as well as oxidising agent
(d)dehydrating agent(1)
4.Which of the following gives the correct increasing order of theatomic radii of  O, F and N?(a)O,  F, N
(b)N, O, F
(c)O, N, F
(d)F, O, N(1)

5.Which of the following statement(s) is(are) true about heart?(i)Left atrium receives oxygenated blood from different parts of the
body while right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from lungs(ii)Left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to different body partswhile right ventricle pumps deoxygenated blood to lungs(iii)Left atrium transfers oxygenated blood to right ventricle whichsends it to different parts of the body(iv)Right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from different parts
of the body while left ventricle pumps oxygenated blood to
different parts of the body(a)(i)(b)(ii)
(c)(ii) and (iv)(d)(i) and (iii)(1)
6.The substance that triggers the fall of mature leaves and fruitsfrom plants is(a)Auxin
(b)Gibberellin
(c)Abscisic acid
(d)Cytokinin(1)
7.Which among the following statements are true for unisexual flowers?(i)They possess both stamen and pistil
(ii)They possess either stamen or pistil(iii)They exhibit cross pollination
(iv)Unisexual flowers possessing only stamens cannot produce fruits
(a)(i) and (iv)(b)(ii), (iii) and (iv)
(c)(iii) and (iv)(d)(i), (iii) and (iv)(1)
8.According to the evolutionary theory, formation of a new speciesis generally due to(a)sudden creation by nature
(b)accumulation of variations over several generations
(c)clones formed during asexual reproduction
(d)movement of individuals from one habitat to another(1)
9.Under which of the following conditions the real image formed by
a concave mirror is  larger than the actual object?(a)When source is at a distance equal to radius of curvature of
the concave mirror(b)When source is at a distance less than the focal length of the
concave mirror(c)When source is placed at a distance between the focus and
centre of curvature of the concave mirror(d)When source is placed at a distance greater than the radius
of curvature  of the concave mirror(1)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II195
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE19610.The path of a ray of light passing through a rectangular glassslab tested by four students are shown in Figure as A, B, C and
D. Which one of them is correct?(a)A
(b)B
(c)C
(d)D(1)
11.In the following given circuits, heat produced in the resistor orcombination of resistors connected to a 12 V battery will be(a)same in all the cases.
(b)minimum in case (i).
(c)maximum in case (ii).
(d)maximum in case (iii).(1)
12.What is the maximum resistance which can be made using fiveresistors each of 1/5 ?(a)1/5 
(b)10 
(c)5 
(d)1 
(1)13.In an electrical circuit three incandescent bulbs A, B and C ofrating 40 W, 60 W and 100 W are connected in parallel to an
electric source. Which of the following is likely to happen regardingtheir brightness?(a)Brightness of all the bulbs will be the same

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II197(b)Brightness of bulb A will be the maximum
(c)Brightness of bulb B will be more than that of A
(d)Brightness of bulb C will be less than that of B(1)
14.Choose the incorrect statement(a)Fleming™s right-hand rule is a simple rule to know the direction
of induced current(b)The right-hand thumb rule is used to find the direction of
magnetic fields due to current carrying conductors(c)The difference between the direct and alternating currents is
that the direct current always flows in one direction, whereasthe alternating current reverses its direction periodically(d)In India the AC changes direction after every 
150 second (1)15.
Among the statements given below select the ones that describethe concept of sustainable development(i)Planned growth with minimum damage to the environment
(ii)Growth irrespective of the extent of damage caused to theenvironment(iii)Stopping all developmental work to conserve the environment(iv)Growth that is acceptable to all the stakeholders
(a)(i) and (iv)
(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iv)
(d)(iii) only(1)
Short Answer Questions16.
Identify the oxidising agent (oxidant) in the following reactions(a)Pb
3O4 + 8HCl  3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O(b)Mg + 2H
2O   Mg (OH)2 + H2(c)CuSO
4  + Zn   Cu + ZnSO4(d)V
2O5 + 5Ca   2V  + 5CaO(˜+˜+˜+˜=2)17.A non-metal A is an important constituent of our food and formstwo oxides B and C. Oxide B is toxic whereas C causes globalwarming(a)Identify A, B and C
(b)To which Group of periodic table A belongs?
(1˜+˜=2)
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE19818.Atomic number of a few elements are given below(i)10(ii)20
(iii)7(iv)14
(a)Identify the elements
(b)Identify the period to which these elements belong
(1 + 1 = 2)19.What will happen if the mucus is not secreted by the gastricglands?(2)
20.Name the plant hormones responsible for the following(a)elongation of cells
(b)growth of stem
(c)promotion of cell division
(d)falling of senescent leaves(˜ + ˜ + ˜ + ˜ = 2)
21.How are general growth and sexual maturation different from
each other?(2)
22.
A very small population of a species faces a greater threat of
extinction. Provide a suitable genetic explanation.(2)
23.It is established that an electric current through a metallicconductor produces a magnetic field around it. Is there a similarmagnetic field produced around a thin beam of moving (i) positivelycharged alpha particles, (ii) neutrons? Justify your answer by
giving suitable arguments.(1 + 1 = 2)
24.A child has drawn the electric circuit to study Ohm™slaw as shown in the figure. His teacher told that the
circuit diagram needs correction.Study the circuit diagram and redraw it after makingall corrections.        (2)
25.Three 2  resistors, A, B, and C, are connected as shown below.Each of them dissipates and can stand a maximum power of 18W  without melting. Find the maximum current that can flowthrough the three resistors.(2)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II19926.Draw the reflected ray corresponding to the ray incident ona concave mirror as shown in the ray diagram?      (2)
27.
Why does a light ray incident on a rectangular glass slabimmersed in any medium emerge parallel to itself? Explainusing a diagram.                                                         (2)28.A person needs a lens of power Œ4.5 D for correction of her vision.(a)What kind of defect in vision is she suffering from?
(b)What is the focal length of the corrective lens?
(c)What is the nature of the corrective lens?(2)
29.In a village in Karnataka, people started cultivating crops allaround a lake which was always filled with water. They addedfertilisers to their field in order to enhance the yield. Soon they
discovered that the waterbody was completely covered with greenfloating plants and fish in the lake started  dying in large numbers.Analyse the situation and give reasons for excessive growth ofplants and death of fishes in the lake.(2)
30.
Although coal and petroleum are produced by degradatioin ofbio- mass, yet we need to conserve them. Why?(2)
Long Answer Questions31.In the followingschematicdiagram for thepreparation ofhydrogen gas asshown in Figure,
what wouldhappen iffollowing changesare made?(a)In place of Zn
granules,same amountof zinc dust istaken in the test tube(b)Instead of dilute sulphuric  acid, dilute hydrochloric acid is taken
(c)In place of Zn, Cu turnings are taken
(d)Sodium hydroxide is taken in place of sulphuric acid and tube
is heated(1˜+1˜+1+1=5)
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE200orA metal carbonate X on reacting with an acid gives a gas whichwhen passed  through a solution Y gives the carbonate back. Onthe other hand, a gas G that is obtained at anode duringelectrolysis of brine is passed on dry Y, it gives a compound Z,used for disinfecting drinking water. Identity X, Y, G and Z. Also,write the chemical reactions involved.(5)
32.
When ethanoic acid reacts with sodium hydrogencarbonate, asalt X is formed and a gas Y is evolved.(a)Identify X and Y. Write chemical equation of reaction involved.
(b)Describe an activity and draw the diagram of the apparatus
to prove that the evolved gas is the one which you have named. (2 + 2 +1 = 5)orLook at Figure and answer the following questions.(a)What change would you observe in
tube B containing calcium hydroxidesolution(b)Write the reaction involved in test tubes
A and B respectively(c)If ethanol is given instead of acetic acid,
would you expect the same change?(d)How can a solution of lime water be
prepared in the laboratory?                                 (1+2+1+1 = 5)33.When do we consider a person to be myopic or hypermetropic?Explain using diagrams how the  defects associated with myopicand hypermetropic eye can be corrected?(5)
orExplain the refraction of light through a triangular glass prismusing a labelled ray diagram. Hence define the angle of deviation.(5)34.How can solar energy be harnessed? What are the limitations in
using solar energy? How are these limitations overcome?(1˜+1˜+2= 5)
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II201orWhat is biomass? Explain the principle and working of a biogasplant using a labelled schematic diagram(2+3 = 5)
35.Explain with the help of a labelled diagram the distribution of amagnetic field due to a current through a circular loop. Why is itthat if a current carrying loop has n turns the field produced atany point is n times as large as that produced by a single turn?(2˜+2˜ = 5)orExplain the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction? Describe
an appropriate experiment to show that a current is set up in a
closed loop when an external magnetic field passing through theloop increases or decreases. (2 + 3 = 5)
36.
Suggest any five activities in daily life which are eco-friendly.(5)orExplain some harmful effects of agricultural practices on theenvironment.(5)

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE202ANSWERSMultiple Choice Questions1.(a)2.(c)3.(b)4.(d)5.(c)6.(c)7.(b)8.(b)9.(c)10.(b)11.(d)12.(d)13.(c)14.  (d)15.(a)Short Answer Questions16.(a)  Pb3O4(b)H
2O(c)CuSO
4(d)V
2O517.   (a)  A is carbon, B is carbon monoxide and C is carbon dioxide(b)Group 14 of periodic table
18.    (a)  Ne,   Ca,   N,    Si(b)2,     3 ,    2,    3

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II20319.Gastric glands in stomach release hydrochloric acid, enzymepepsin and mucus. The mucus protects the inner lining of the
stomach from the action of hydrochloric acid and enzyme pepsin.If mucus is not released, it will lead to erosion of inner lining ofstomach, which may cause acidity and ulcer.20.(a)  Auxin(b)Gibberellin
(c)Cytokinin
(d)Abscisic acid
21.
General growth refers to different types of developmental processin the body like increase in height, weight gain, changes in shapeand size of the body but sexual maturation is specific to changes
reflected at puberty like cracking of voice, new hair patterns,development of breast in female etc.22.Fewer individuals in a species impose extensive inbreeding among
them. This limits the appearance of variations and puts the speciesat a disadvantage if there are changes in the environment. Since
the individuals fail to cope up with the environmental changes,they may become extinct.23.HintŠ
(i) Yes, (ii) No. Alpha particles are positively charged particlesand therefore a thin beam of moving alpha particles constitutes acurrent in the direction of motion of the alpha particles. The neutrons
on the other hand are electrically neutral and therefore there is nocurrent associated with the thin beam of moving neutrons.24.25.Maximum current through resistor A = 18A=3 A.
2 Thus the maximum current through resistors B and C, each= 13×A=1.5A.
2 
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE20426.27.HintŠ
 Draw the diagram and explain using laws of refraction atboth interfaces.28.(a) Myopia(b) Œ 0.22 
m(c) Concave Lens
29.HintŠ
 Since people used excessive fertilisers in the fields, theywere carried down to the lake by the rains. As many fertiliserscontain phosphates and nitrates, the water body became enrichedwith these chemicals. These chemicals promote excessive growthof aquatic plants and the surface of water was completely coveredwith plants (eutrophication). Due to insufficient availability ofdissolved oxygen and nutrients resulted in the death of fish.30.Both the energy sources, coal and petroleum, take millions ofyears for their formation. As these resources are being utilised ata much faster rate than their formation, they will be exhaustedin the near future, hence they need to be conserved.Long Answer Questions31.HintŠ
(a)  Hydrogen gas will evolve with a greater speed(b)Almost same amount of gas is evolved
(c)Hydrogen gas is not evolved
(d)If sodium hydroxide is taken, hydrogen gas will be evolved
Zn + 2NaOH     Na2 ZnO2        + H2                       Sodium zincateorThe gas G evolved at anode during electrolysis of brine is chlorineWhen chlorine gas is passed through dry Ca(OH)2  (Y), it producesbleaching powder Z used for disinfecting drinking water.Ca (OH)2  + Cl2  CaOCl2 + H2OSlakedBleachinglimepowderSince Y and Z are calcium salts, therefore X is also a calcium saltand is calcium carbonate.CaCO3 + 2 HCl  CaCl2 + CO2 + H2OCa (OH)2 + CO2  CaCO3 + H2O
SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II20532.(a) CH3 COOH + NaHCO3  CH3 COO Na + H2O + CO2  X is sodium ethanoateGas evolved is carbon dioxide (Y)(b) The gas evolved during the reaction is passed through a deliverytube into the test tube containing lime water. The lime watersolution turns milky due to the formation of calcium carbonate,a characteristic property of CO2 gas.or(a)It will turn milky
(b)2CH
3 COOH + Na2CO3  2CH3COONa + H2O + CO2 (Test tubeA)Ca(OH)2 + CO2  CaCO3 + H2O (Test tube B)With excess CO2, milkyness disappears. CaCO3 + H2O + CO2  Ca (H CO3)2(c)As C
2H5OH and Na2CO3 do not react, a similar change is notexpected
C2H5OH + Na2CO3   No change(d)The lime water is prepared by dissolving  calcium oxide in
water and decanting the supernatent liquid. The reaction isreferred to as slaking of limeCaO (s) + H2O (l)  Ca(OH)2 (aq) + Heat
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE20633.

SAMPLE QUESTION PAPER-II207HintŠ When a person is not able to see distant objects clearly butcan see nearby objects clearly then he/she is considered to bemyopic. If it is othewise, he/she is hypermetropic. Give explanationbased on figures.orHintŠ Give explanation based on figure. Angle of deviation is theangle D, between the incident ray and the emergent ray when alight ray passes through a glass prism.34.HintŠ 
Answer must include working of a solar device usingreflectors/solar cell; limitations; available during day time/sunnydays. Requires huge costly installations. To overcome limitation:use of solar cell.orHintŠ Biomass- Plant and animal wastes       Give description of biogas plant with the help of label diagram
.35.HintŠ The magnetic field at a point is the resultant of the fieldproduced by each turn.
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE208orHintŠ The process by which changing magnetic field in aconductor induces a current in another conductor is calledelectromagnetic induction.Explain the working of the setup with the help of the diagram.36.HintŠ 
(i)   Separation of biodegradable and non-biodegradablesubstances.(ii)Gardening(iii)Use of gunny bags/paper bags in place of polythene/plastic
bags(iv)Use of compost and vermicompost in place of fertilisers
(v)Harvesting  rain water
orHintŠ(a)Exessive use of fertilisers changes the chemistry of soil and
kills useful microbes.(b)Excessive use of non-biodegradable chemical pesticides leads
to biological magnification.(c)Extensive cropping causes loss of soil fertility.
(d)Excessive use of ground water for agriculture lowers the water
table.(e)Damage to natural ecosystem/habitat.

