Multiple Choice Questions
1.Carbon exists in the atmosphere in the form of(a)carbon monoxide only
(b)carbon monoxide in traces and carbon dioxide
(c)carbon dioxide only
(d)coal
2.Which of the following statements are usually correct for carboncompounds? These(i)are good conductors of electricity
(ii)are 
poor conductors of electricity(iii)have strong forces of attraction between their molecules
(iv)do 
not have strong forces of attraction between their molecules(a)(i) and (iii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (iv)(d)(ii) and (iv)
3.A molecule of ammonia (NH3) has(a)only single bonds
(b)only double bonds
(c)only triple bonds
(d)two double bonds and one single bond
4.Buckminsterfullerene is an allotropic form of(a)phosphorus
(b)sulphur
(c)carbon
(d)tin
Carbon and itsCompounds4CHAPTER
5.Which of the following are correct structural isomers of butane?(i)(iii)  (ii)(iv)  (a)(i) and (iii)(b)(ii) and (iv)
(c)(i) and (ii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
6.CH3Œ CH2Œ OH  4AlkalineKMnOHeat
+  CH3 Œ COOHIn the above given reaction, alkaline KMnO4  acts as(a)reducing agent
(b)oxidising agent
(c)catalyst
(d)dehydrating agent
7.Oils on treating with hydrogen in the presence of palladium ornickel catalyst form fats. This is an example of(a)Addition reaction
(b)Substitution reaction
(c)Displacement reaction
(d)Oxidation reaction
8.In which of the following compounds, Š OH is the functionalgroup?(a)Butanone
(b)Butanol
(c)Butanoic acid
(d)Butanal
9.The soap molecule has a(a)hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail
(b)hydrophobic head and a hydrophilic tail
(c)hydrophobic head and a hydrophobic tail
(d)hydrophilic head and a hydrophilic tail
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS29
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE3010.Which of the following is the correct representation of electrondot structure of nitrogen?(a)(b)(c)(d)11.Structural formula of ethyne is(a)HŒCCŒ
 H(b)3HŒCCŒ
 H(c)(d)12.Identify the unsaturated compounds from the following(i)Propane
(ii)Propene(iii)Propyne
(iv)Chloropropane
(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iv)
(c)(iii) and (iv)(d)(ii) and (iii)
13.Chlorine reacts with saturated hydrocarbons at room temperaturein the(a)absence of sunlight
(b)presence of sunlight
(c)presence of water
(d)presence of hydrochloric acid
14.In the soap micelles(a)the ionic end of soap is on the surface of the cluster while the
carbon chain is in the interior of the cluster.
(b)ionic end of soap is in the interior of the cluster and the carbon
chain is out of the cluster.(c)both ionic end and carbon chain are in the interior of the
cluster(d)both ionic end and carbon chain are on the exterior of the
cluster
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS3115.Pentane has the molecular formula C5 H12. It has(a)5 covalent bonds
(b)12 covalent bonds
(c)16 covalent bonds
(d)17 covalent bonds
16.Structural formula of benzene is(a)
(b)   (c)(d)  17.Ethanol reacts with sodium and forms two products. These are(a)sodium ethanoate and hydrogen
(b)sodium ethanoate and oxygen
(c)sodium ethoxide and hydrogen
(d)sodium ethoxide and oxygen
18.The correct structural formula of butanoic acid is(a)(b)  (c)(d)  19.Vinegar is a solution of(a)50% Œ 60% acetic acid in alcohol
(b)5% Œ 8% acetic acid in alcohol
(c)5% Œ 8% acetic acid in water
(d)50% Œ 60% acetic acid in water

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE3220.Mineral acids are stronger acids than carboxylic acids because(i)mineral acids are completely ionised
(ii)carboxylic acids are completely ionised(iii)mineral acids are partially ionised
(iv)carboxylic acids are partially ionised
(a)(i) and (iv)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(i) and (ii)(d)(iii) and (iv)
21.Carbon forms four covalent bonds by sharing its four valenceelectrons with four univalent atoms, e.g. hydrogen. After theformation of four bonds, carbon attains the electronicconfiguration of(a)helium
(b)neon
(c)argon
(d)krypton
22.The correct electron dot structure of a water molecule is(a)(b)(c)(d)23.Which of the following is not a straight chain hydrocarbon?(a)(b)(c)(d)24.Which among the following are unsaturated hydrocarbons?(i)H
3C Š CH2 Š CH2 Š CH3(ii)(iii)(iv)(a)(i) and (iii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(ii) and (iv)(d)(iii) and (iv)

CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS3325.Which of the following does not belong to the same homologousseries?(a)CH
4(b)C
2 H6(c)C
3 H8(d)C
4 H826.The name of the compound CH3 Š CH2 Š CHO is(a)Propanal
(b)Propanone
(c)Ethanol
(d)Ethanal
27.The heteroatoms present inCH3 Š CH2 Š O Š CH2Š CH2 Cl  are(i)oxygen
(ii)carbon(iii)hydrogen
(iv)chlorine(a)(i) and (ii)(b)(ii) and (iii)
(c)(iii) and (iv)(d)(i) and (iv)
28.Which of the following represents saponification reaction?(a)CH
3COONa + NaOH CH4 + Na2CO3(b)CH
3COOH + C2H5OH CH3 COOC2H5 +H2O(c)2CH
3COOH + 2Na   2CH
3 COONa + H2(d)CH
3COOC2H5 + NaOH  CH3 COONa + C2 H5OH29.The first member of alkyne homologous series is(a)ethyne
(b)ethene
(c)propyne
(d)methane
Short Answer Questions
30.Draw the electron dot structure of ethyne and also draw itsstructural formula
EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE3431.Write the names of the following compounds(a)(b)   (c)(d)32.Identify and name the functional groups present in the followingcompounds.(a)(b)   (c)(d)   33.A compound X is formed by the reaction of a carboxylic acid
C2H4O2 and an alcohol in presence of a few drops of H2SO4. Thealcohol on oxidation with alkaline KMnO4 followed by acidificationgives the same carboxylic acid as used in this reaction. Give thenames and structures of (a) carboxylic acid, (b) alcohol and (c)the compound X. Also write the reaction.34.Why detergents are better cleansing agents than soaps? Explain.35.Name the functional groups present in the following compounds(a)CH
3 CO CH2 CH2 CH2 CH3(b)CH
3 CH2 CH2 COOH(c)CH
3  CH2  CH2 CH2 CHO(d)CH
3  CH2  OH36.How is ethene prepared from ethanol? Give the reaction
involved in it.37.Intake of small quantity of methanol can be lethal. Comment.
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS3538.A gas is evolved when ethanol reacts with sodium. Name the gasevolved and also write the balanced chemical equation of  the reaction
involved.39.Ethene is formed when ethanol at 443 K is heated with excess ofconcentrated sulphuric acid. What is the role of sulphuric acid inthis reaction? Write the balanced chemical equation of thisreaction.40.Carbon, Group (14) element in the Periodic Table, is known toform compounds with many elements.Write an example of a compound formed with(a)chlorine
(Group 17 of Periodic Table)(b)oxgygen
(Group 16 of Periodic Table)41.In electron dot structure, the valence shell electrons arerepresented by crosses or dots.(a)The atomic number of chlorine is 17. Write its electronic
configuration(b)Draw the electron dot structure of chlorine molecule.
42.Catenation is the ability of an atom to form bonds with other
atoms of the same element. It is exhibited by both carbon andsilicon. Compare the ability of catenation of the two elements.Give reasons.43.Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain multiple bonds between thetwo C-
atoms and 
show addition reactions. Give the test todistinguish ethane from ethene.44.Match the reactions given in Column (A) with the names givenin column (B).
              Column (A)Column (B)
(a)CH
3OH + CH3COOH  CH3COOCH3 + H2O(i)Addition reaction
(b)CH
2 = CH2 + H2   CH3 Š CH3(ii)Substitution reaction(c)CH
4 + Cl2 CH3Cl + HCl(iii)Neutralisation reaction
(d)CH
3COOH+NaOH CH3COONa+H2O(iv)Esterification reaction

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS Œ SCIENCE3645.Write the structural formulae of all the isomers of hexane.46.What is the role of metal or reagents written on arrows in thegiven chemical reactions?(a)(b)CH
3 COOH + CH3 CH2 OH  CH3 COOC2 H5 + H2O(c)CH
3 CH2 OH  CH3  COOHLong Answer Questions
47.A salt X is formed and a gas is evolved when ethanoic acid reactswith sodium hydrogencarbonate. Name the salt X and the gas
evolved. Describe an activity and draw the diagram of theapparatus to prove that the evolved gas is the one which youhave named. Also, write chemical equation of the reaction involved.48.(a)  What are hydrocarbons? Give examples.(b)Give the structural differences between saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons with two examples each.(c)What is a functional group? Give examples of four different
functional groups.49.Name the reaction which is commonly used in the conversion ofvegetable oils to fats. Explain the reaction involved in detail.50.(a)  Write the  formula and draw electron dot structure of carbon      tetrachloride.(b)What is saponification? Write the reaction involved in this
process.51.Esters are sweet-smelling substances and are used in makingperfumes. Suggest some activity and the reaction involved for thepreparation of an ester with well labeled diagram.52.A compound C (molecular formula, C2H4O2) reacts with Na - metalto form a compound  R and evolves a gas which burns with a popsound. Compound C on treatment with an alcohol A in presence
of an acid forms a sweet smelling compound S (molecular formula,C3H6O2). On addition of NaOH to C, it also gives R and water. S ontreatment with NaOH solution gives back R and A.Identify C, R, A, S and write down the reactions involved.
CARBON AND ITS COMPOUNDS3753.Look at Figure 4.1 and answer the following questions(a)What change would you
observe in the calciumhydroxide solution taken intube B?(b)Write the reaction involved
in test tubes A and Brespectively.(c)If ethanol is given instead of
ethanoic acid, would youexpect the same change?(d)How can a solution of lime
water be prepared in the
laboratory?54.How would you bring about thefollowing conversions? Namethe process and write the reaction involved.(a)ethanol to ethene.
(b)propanol to propanoic acid.
Write the reactions.55.Draw the possible isomers of the compound with molecular
formula C3H6O and also give their electron dot structures.56.Explain the given reactions with the examples(a)Hydrogenation reaction
(b)Oxidation reaction
(c)Substitution reaction
(d)Saponification reaction
(e)Combustion reaction
57.An organic compound A on heating with concentrated H2SO4 formsa compound B which on addition of one mole of hydrogen inpresence of Ni forms a compound C. One mole of compound C oncombustion forms two moles of CO2 and 3 moles of H2O. Identifythe compounds A, B and C and write the chemical equations ofthe reactions involved.Fig. 4.1
