Life Processes6CHAPTERHow do we tell the difference between what is alive and what is notalive? If we see a dog running, or a cow chewing cud, or a manshouting loudly on the street, we know that these are living beings. Whatif the dog or the cow or the man were asleep? We would still think thatthey were alive, but how did we know that? We see them breathing, andwe know that they are alive. What about plants? How do we know thatthey are alive? We see them green, some of us will say. But what aboutplants that have leaves of colours other than green? They grow overtime, so we know that they are alive, some will say. In other words, wetend to think of some sort of movement, either growth-related or not, as
common evidence for being alive. But a plant that is not visibly growing isstill alive, and some animals can breathe without visible movement. Sousing visible movement as the defining characteristic of life is not enough.Movements over very small scales will be invisible to the naked eye Œmovements of molecules, for example. Is this invisible molecular
movement necessary for life? If we ask this question to professional
biologists, they will say yes. In fact, viruses do not show any molecularmovement in them (until they infect some cell), and that is partly whythere is a controversy about whether they are truly alive or not.Why are molecular movements needed for life? We have seen in earlierclasses that living organisms are well-organised structures; they can
have tissues, tissues have cells, cells have smaller components in them,
and so on. Because of the effects of the environment, this organised,ordered nature of living structures is very likely to keep breaking downover time. If order breaks down, the organism will no longer be alive. So
living creatures must keep repairing and maintaining their structures.Since all these structures are made up of molecules, they must movemolecules around all the time.What are the maintenance processes in living organisms?Let us explore.6.1 WHA6.1 WHA6.1 WHA6.1 WHA6.1 WHAT ARE LIFE PROCESSES?T ARE LIFE PROCESSES?T ARE LIFE PROCESSES?T ARE LIFE PROCESSES?T ARE LIFE PROCESSES?The maintenance functions of living organisms must go on even whenthey are not doing anything particular. Even when we are just sitting in
Science94class, even if we are just asleep, this maintenance job has to go on.The processes which together perform this maintenance job arelife processes.Since these maintenance processes are needed to prevent damageand break-down, energy is needed for them. This energy comes fromoutside the body of the individual organism. So there must be a processto transfer a source of energy from outside the body of the organism,which we call food, to the inside, a process we commonly call nutrition.
If the body size of the organisms is to grow, additional raw material will
also be needed from outside. Since life on earth depends on carbon-based molecules, most of these food sources are also carbon-based.Depending on the complexity of these carbon sources, different
organisms can then use different kinds of nutritional processes.The outside sources of energy could be quite varied, since theenvironment is not under the control of the individual organism. These
sources of energy, therefore, need to be broken down or built up in the
body, and must be finally converted to a uniform source of energy that
can be used for the various molecular movements needed formaintaining living structures, as well as to the kind of molecules thebody needs to grow. For this, a series of chemical reactions in thebody are necessary. Oxidising-reducing reactions are some of the mostcommon chemical means to break-down molecules. For this, manyorganisms use oxygen sourced from outside the body. The process
of acquiring oxygen from outside the body, and to use it in the processof break-down of food sources for cellular needs, is what we callrespiration.In the case of a single-celled organism, no specific organs for takingin food, exchange of gases or removal of wastes may be needed because
the entire surface of the organism is in contact with the environment.
But what happens when the body size of the organism increases andthe body design becomes more complex? In multi-cellular organisms,all the cells may not be in direct contact with the surrounding
environment. Thus, simple diffusion will not meet the requirements of
all the cells.We have seen previously how, in multi-cellular organisms, variousbody parts have specialised in the functions they perform. We are familiarwith the idea of these specialised tissues, and with their organisation inthe body of the organism. It is therefore not surprising that the uptakeof food and of oxygen will also be the function of specialised tissues.
However, this poses a problem, since the food and oxygen are now takenup at one place in the body of the organisms, while all parts of the bodyneed them. This situation creates a need for a transportation system forcarrying food and oxygen from one place to another in the body.When chemical reactions use the carbon source and the oxygen forenergy generation,  they create by-products that are not only uselessfor the cells of the body, but could even be harmful. These waste by-products are  therefore needed to be removed from the body and discardedoutside  by a process called excretion. Again, if the basic rules for body
Life Processes95design in multi-cellular organisms are followed, a specialised tissue forexcretion will be developed, which means that the transportation systemwill need to transport waste away from cells to this excretory tissue.Let us consider these various processes, so essential to maintainlife, one by one.QUEST1IONS?1.Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of multi-cellular organisms like humans?2.What criteria do we use to decide whether something is alive?3.What are outside raw materials used for by an organism?4.What processes would you consider essential for maintaining life?6.2 NUTRITION6.2 NUTRITION6.2 NUTRITION6.2 NUTRITION6.2 NUTRITIONWhen we walk or ride a bicycle, we are using up energy. Even when weare not doing any apparent activity, energy is needed to maintain astate of order in our body. We also need materials from outside in orderto grow, develop, synthesise protein and other substances needed inthe body. This source of energy and materials is the food we eat.How do living things get their food?The general requirement for energy and materials is common in allorganisms, but it is fulfilled in different ways. Some organisms use simplefood material obtained from inorganic sources in the form of carbondioxide and water. These organisms, the autotrophs, include greenplants and some bacteria. Other organisms utilise complex substances.These complex substances have to be broken down into simpler ones
before they can be used for the upkeep and growth of the body. Toachieve this, organisms use bio-catalysts called enzymes. Thus, theheterotrophs survival depends directly or indirectly on autotrophs.
Heterotrophic organisms include animals and fungi.6.2.1 Autotrophic NutritionCarbon and energy requirements of the autotrophic organism arefulfilled by photosynthesis. It is the process by which autotrophs take
in substances from the outside and convert them into stored forms ofenergy. This material is taken in the form of carbon dioxide and waterwhich is converted into carbohydrates in the presence of sunlight andchlorophyll. Carbohydrates are utilised for providing energy to the plant.We will study how this takes place in the next section. The carbohydrateswhich are not used immediately are stored in the form of starch, whichserves as the internal energy reserve to be used as and when requiredby the plant. A somewhat similar situation is seen in us where some ofthe energy derived from the food we eat is stored in our body in the form
of glycogen.
Science96Let us now see what actually happens during the process ofphotosynthesis. The following events occur during this process ŒFigure 6.2Variegated leaf (a) beforeand (b) after starch testFigure 6.1
Cross-section of a leafActivity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1nTake a potted plant with variegated leaves Œ for example, money plantor crotons.nKeep the plant in a dark room for three days so that all the starchgets used up.nNow keep the plant in sunlight for about six hours.nPluck a leaf from the plant. Mark the green areas in it and trace themon a sheet of paper.nDip the leaf in boiling water for a few minutes.nAfter this, immerse it in a beaker containing alcohol.nCarefully place the above beaker in a water-bath and heat till thealcohol begins to boil.nWhat happens to the colour of the leaf? What is the colour of thesolution?nNow dip the leaf in a dilute solution of iodine for a few minutes.nTake out the leaf and rinse off the iodine solution.nObserve the colour of the leaf and compare this with the tracing ofthe leaf done in the beginning (Fig. 6.2).nWhat can you conclude about the presence of starch in various areasof the leaf?(i)Absorption of light energy bychlorophyll.(ii)Conversion of light energy to chemicalenergy and splitting of water molecules
into hydrogen and oxygen.(iii)Reduction of carbon dioxide to
carbohydrates.These steps need not take place one afterthe other immediately. For example, desertplants take up carbon dioxide at night andprepare an intermediate which is acted upon
by the energy absorbed by the chlorophyll
during the day.Let us see how each of the components ofthe above reaction are necessary for
photosynthesis.If you carefully observe a cross-section of aleaf under the microscope (shown in Fig. 6.1),
you will notice that some cells contain green
dots. These green dots are cell organelles called
chloroplasts which contain chlorophyll. Let usdo an activity which demonstrates thatchlorophyll is essential for photosynthesis.
Life Processes97Now, let us study how the plantobtains carbon dioxide. In Class IX,we had talked about stomata (Fig. 6.3)which are tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. Massive amounts
of gaseous exchange takes place in theleaves through these pores for thepurpose of photosynthesis. But it is
important to note here that exchange
of gases occurs across the surface ofstems, roots and leaves as well. Sincelarge amounts of water can also be lostthrough these stomata, the plant
closes these pores when it does notneed carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of thepore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water
flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore
closes if the guard cells shrink.nTake two healthy potted plantswhich are nearly the same size.nKeep them in a dark room for
three days.nNow place each plant on
separate glass plates. Place awatch-glass containing potassiumhydroxide by the side of one ofthe plants. The potassiumhydroxide is used to absorbcarbon dioxide.nCover both plants with separate
bell-jars as shown in Fig. 6.4.nUse vaseline to seal the bottom
of the jars to the glass plates sothat the set-up is air-tight.nKeep the plants in sunlight forabout two hours.nPluck a leaf from each plant and check for the presence of starch as in the above activity.nDo both the leaves show the presence of the same amount of starch?nWhat can you conclude from this activity?Figure 6.3 (a) Open and (b) closed stomatal poreActivity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Based on the two activities performed above, can we design anexperiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?So far, we have talked about how autotrophs meet their energyrequirements. But they also need other raw materials for building theirbody. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up from the soil by theroots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus,iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential
element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This isFigure 6.4 Experimental set-up (a) with potassiumhydroxide (b) without potassium hydroxide(a)(b)
Science98taken up in the form of inorganic nitrates or nitrites. Or it is taken up asorganic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria fromatmospheric nitrogen.6.2.2 Heterotrophic NutritionEach organism is adapted to its environment. The form of nutritiondiffers depending on the type and availability of food material as wellas how it is obtained by the organism. For example, whether the foodsource is stationary (such as grass) or mobile (such as a deer), wouldallow for differences in how the food is accessed and what is the nutritiveapparatus used by a cow and a lion. There is a range of strategies by
which the food is taken in and used by the organism. Some organismsbreak-down the food material outside the body and then absorb it.Examples are fungi like bread moulds, yeast and mushrooms. Others
take in whole material and break it down inside their bodies. What canbe taken in and broken down depends on the body design andfunctioning. Some other organisms derive nutrition from plants or
animals without killing them. This parasitic nutritive strategy is usedby a wide variety of organisms like cuscuta (amar-bel), ticks, lice,leeches and tape-worms.6.2.3 How do Organisms obtain their Nutrition?Since the food and the way it is obtained differ, the digestive system isdifferent in various organisms. In single-celled organisms, the foodmay be taken in by the entire surface. But as the complexity of theorganism increases, different parts become specialised to performdifferent functions. For example, Amoeba takes in food usingtemporary finger-like extensions of the cell surface which fuse overthe food particle forming a food-vacuole (Fig. 6.5). Inside the food-
vacuole, complex substances are broken down into simpler oneswhich then diffuse into the cytoplasm. The remaining undigested
material is moved to the surface of the cell and thrown out. InParamoecium, which is also a unicellular organism, the cell has adefinite shape and food is taken in at a specific spot. Food is movedto this spot by the movement of cilia which cover the entire surfaceof the cell.6.2.4 Nutrition in Human BeingsThe alimentary canal is basically a long tube extending from the mouthto the anus. In Fig. 6.6, we can see that the tube has different parts.Various regions are specialised to perform different functions. Whathappens to the food once it enters our body? We shall discuss thisprocess here.Figure 6.5Nutrition in Amoeba
Life Processes99Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3nTake 1 mL starch solution (1%) in two test tubes (A and B).nAdd 1 mL saliva to test tube A and leave both test tubes undisturbedfor 20-30 minutes.nNow add a few drops of dilute iodine solution to the test tubes.nIn which test tube do you observe a colour change?nWhat does this indicate about the presence or absence of starch
in the two test tubes?nWhat does this tell us about the action of saliva on starch?We eat various types of food which has to pass through the samedigestive tract. Naturally the food has to be processed to generateparticles which are small and of the same texture. This is achieved by
crushing the food with our teeth. Since the lining of the canal is soft, thefood is also wetted to make its passage smooth. When we eat somethingwe like, our mouth ‚waters™. This is actually not only water, but a fluidcalled saliva secreted by the salivary glands. Another aspect of the foodwe ingest is its complex nature. If it is to be absorbed from the alimentary
canal, it has to be broken into smaller molecules. This is done with the
help of biological catalysts called
enzymes. The saliva contains an
enzyme called salivary amylase that
breaks down starch which is a
complex molecule to give sugar. Thefood is mixed thoroughly with saliva
and moved around the mouth while
chewing by the muscular tongue.It is necessary to move the food ina regulated manner along the digestive
tube so that it can be processed
properly in each part. The lining of
canal has muscles that contract
rhythmically in order to push the food
forward. These peristaltic movements
occur all along the gut.From the mouth, the food is takento the stomach through the food-pipe
or oesophagus. The stomach is a large
organ which expands when food
enters it. The muscular walls of thestomach help in mixing the foodthoroughly with more digestive juices.These digestion functions aretaken care of by the gastric glands present in the wall of the stomach.
These release hydrochloric acid, a protein digesting enzyme called
pepsin, and mucus. The hydrochloric acid creates an acidic medium
which facilitates the action of the enzyme pepsin. What other function
do you think is served by the acid? The mucus protects the inner lining
of the stomach from the action of the acid under normal conditions. WeFigure 6.6 Human alimentary canal
Science100have often heard adults complaining about ‚acidity™. Can this be relatedto what has been discussed above?The exit of food from the stomach is regulated by a sphincter musclewhich releases it in small amounts into the small intestine. From thestomach, the food now enters the small intestine. This is the longest partof the alimentary canal which is fitted into a compact space because ofextensive coiling. The length of the small intestine differs in various
animals depending on the food they eat. Herbivores eating grass need alonger small intestine to allow the cellulose to be digested. Meat is easierto digest, hence carnivores like tigers have a shorter small intestine.The small intestine is the site of the complete digestion ofcarbohydrates, proteins and fats. It receives the secretions of the liverand pancreas for this purpose. The food coming from the stomach is
acidic and has to be made alkaline for the pancreatic enzymes to act.Bile juice from the liver accomplishes this in addition to acting on fats.Fats are present in the intestine in the form of large globules which makes
it difficult for enzymes to act on them. Bile salts break them down intosmaller globules increasing the efficiency of enzyme action. This is similarto the emulsifying action of soaps on dirt that we have learnt about inChapter 4. The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which containsenzymes like trypsin for digesting proteins and lipase for breaking downemulsified fats. The walls of the small intestine contain glands which
secrete intestinal juice. The enzymes present in it finally convert theproteins to amino acids, complex carbohydrates into glucose and fatsinto fatty acids and glycerol.The digested food is taken up by the walls of the intestine. The innerlining of the small intestine has numerous finger-like projections calledvilli which increase the surface area for absorption. The villi are richly
supplied with blood vessels which take the absorbed food to each andevery cell of the body, where it is utilised for obtaining energy, buildingup new tissues and the repair of old tissues.The unabsorbed food is sent into the large intestine where more villiabsorb water from this material. The rest of the material is removed from
the body via the anus. The exit of this waste material is regulated by the
anal sphincter.More to Know!Dental cariesDental caries or tooth decay causes gradual softening of enamel and dentine. It beginswhen bacteria acting on sugars produce acids that softens or demineralises the enamel.Masses of bacterial cells together with food particles stick to the teeth to form dentalplaque. Saliva cannot reach the tooth surface to neutralise the acid as plaque coversthe teeth. Brushing the teeth after eating removes the plaque before the bacteriaproduce acids. If untreated, microorganisms may invade the pulp, causinginflammation and infection.
Life Processes1016.3 RESPIR6.3 RESPIR6.3 RESPIR6.3 RESPIR6.3 RESPIRAA
AA
ATIONTIONTIONTIONTIONActivity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4nTake some freshly prepared limewater in a test tube.nBlow air through this lime water.nNote how long it takes for the limewater to turn milky.nUse a syringe or pichkari to pass airthrough some fresh lime watertaken in another test tube (Fig. 6.7).nNote how long it takes for this limewater to turn milky.nWhat does this tell us about the
amount of carbon dioxide in the airthat we breathe out?1.What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophicnutrition?2.Where do plants get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?3.What is the role of the acid in our stomach?4.What is the function of digestive enzymes?5.How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food?TubeTest tube containing
lime waterLimewaterRubber
tube(a)(b)
PichkariQUESTIONS?Activity 6.5Activity 6.5Activity 6.5Activity 6.5Activity 6.5nTake some fruit juice or sugar solution and add some yeast tothis. Take this mixture in a test tube fitted with a one-holed cork.nFit the cork with a bent glass tube. Dip the free end of the glass
tube into a test tube containing freshly prepared lime water.nWhat change is observed in the lime water and how long does it
take for this change to occur?nWhat does this tell us about the products of fermentation?We have discussed nutrition in organisms in the last section. Thefood material taken in during the process of nutrition is used in cells toprovide energy for various life processes. Diverse organisms do this indifferent ways Œ some use oxygen to break-down glucose completelyinto carbon dioxide and water, some use other pathways that do notinvolve oxygen (Fig. 6.8). In all cases, the first step is the break-down ofglucose, a six-carbon molecule, into a three-carbon molecule called
pyruvate. This process takes place in the cytoplasm. Further, thepyruvate may be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide. This process
takes place in yeast during fermentation. Since this process takes place
in the absence of air (oxygen), it is called anaerobic respiration. Break-
down of pyruvate using oxygen takes place in the mitochondria. ThisFigure 6.7(a) Air being passed into lime water with a pichkari/syringe, (b) air being exhaled into lime water
Science102process breaks up the three-carbon pyruvate molecule to give threemolecules of carbon dioxide. The other product is water. Since thisprocess takes place in the presence of air (oxygen), it is called aerobic
respiration. The release of energy in this aerobic process is a lot greaterthan in the anaerobic process. Sometimes, when there is a lack of oxygen
in our muscle cells, another pathway for the break-down of pyruvate istaken. Here the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid which is also athree-carbon molecule. This build-up of lactic acid in our muscles during
sudden activity causes cramps.Figure 6.8 Break-down of glucose by various pathwaysThe energy released during cellular respiration is immediately usedto synthesise a molecule called ATP which is used to fuel all otheractivities in the cell. In these processes, ATP is broken down giving riseto a fixed amount of energy which can drive the endothermic reactions
taking place in the cell.ATPATP is the energy currency for most cellular processes. The energy released duringthe process of respiration is used to make an ATP molecule from ADP and inorganicphosphate.Endothermic processes in the cell then use this ATP to drive the reactions. When theterminal phosphate linkage in ATP is broken using water, the energy equivalent to30.5 kJ/mol is released.Think of how a battery can provide energy for many different kinds of uses. It can beused to obtain mechanical energy, light energy, electrical energy and so on. Similarly,ATP can be used in the cells for the contraction of muscles, protein synthesis,conduction of nervous impulses and many other activities.Since the aerobic respiration pathway depends on oxygen, aerobicorganisms need to ensure that there is sufficient intake of oxygen. Wehave seen that plants exchange gases through stomata, and the largeinter-cellular spaces ensure that all cells are in contact with air. Carbondioxide and oxygen are exchanged by diffusion here. They can go intoMore to Know!
Life Processes103cells, or away from them and out into the air. The direction of diffusiondepends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements ofthe plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO2elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,CO2 generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hencethere is no CO2 release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event atthis time.Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygenfrom the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxideproduced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water.Activity 6.6Activity 6.6Activity 6.6Activity 6.6Activity 6.6nObserve fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouthsand the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of theopening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in somemanner?nCount the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.nCompare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
minute.Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared to theamount of oxygen in the air, the rate of breathing in aquatic organismsis much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms. Fishes take inwater through their mouths and force it past the gills where the dissolved
oxygen is taken up by blood.Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere forrespiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in differentanimals. All these organs have a structure that increases the surface
area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich atmosphere. Since theexchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide has to take place across thissurface, this surface is very fine and delicate. In order to protect this
surface, it is usually placed within the body, so there have to be passages
that will take air to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for movingthe air in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.In human beings (Fig. 6.9), air is taken into the body through thenostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by fine hairs thatline the passage. The passage is also lined with mucus which helps inthis process. From here, the air passes through the throat and into thelungs. Rings of cartilage are present in the throat. These ensure that the
air-passage does not collapse.
Science104Within the lungs, the passage divides into smaller and smaller tubeswhich finally terminate in balloon-like structures which are calledalveoli. The alveoli provide a surface where the exchange of gases cantake place. The walls of the alveoli contain an extensive network ofblood-vessels. As we have seen in earlier years, when we breathe in, we
lift our ribs and flatten our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomeslarger as a result. Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fillsthe expanded alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest ofthe body for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar airis taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported to
all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is takenin and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume of air sothat there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed and for the carbondioxide to be released.When the body size of animals is large,  the diffusion pressure alonecannot take care of oxygen delivery to all parts of the body. Instead,respiratory pigments take up oxygen from the air in the lungs and carry
it to tissues which are deficient in oxygen before releasing it. In humanbeings, the respiratory pigment is haemoglobin which has a very highaffinity for oxygen. This pigment is present in the red blood corpuscles.Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water than oxygen is and hence ismostly transported in the dissolved form in our blood.Figure 6.9 Human respiratory system
Life Processes1056.4 TR6.4 TR6.4 TR6.4 TR6.4 TRANSPORTANSPORTANSPORTANSPORTANSPORTAA
AA
ATIONTIONTIONTIONTION6.4.1 Transportation in Human BeingsDo You Know?nIf the alveolar surface were spread out, it would cover about 80 m2. How muchdo you think the surface area of your body is? Consider how efficient exchangeof gases becomes because of the large surface available for the exchange to takeplace.nIf diffusion were to move oxygen in our body, it is estimated that it would take 3years for a molecule of oxygen to get to our toes from our lungs. Aren™t you gladthat we have haemoglobin?QUESTIONS?1.What advantage over an aquatic organism does a terrestrial organismhave with regard to obtaining oxygen for respiration?2.What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidised to provideenergy in various organisms?3.How is oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in human beings?4.How are the lungs designed in human beings to maximise the area forexchange of gases?Activity 6.7Activity 6.7Activity 6.7Activity 6.7Activity 6.7nVisit a health centre in your locality and find out what is thenormal range of haemoglobin content in human beings.nIs it the same for children and adults?nIs there any difference in the haemoglobin levels for men andwomen?nVisit a veterinary clinic in your locality. Find out what is the normal
range of haemoglobin content in an animal like the buffaloor cow.nIs this content different in calves, male and female animals?nCompare the difference seen in male and female human beingsand animals.nHow would the difference, if any, be explained?We have seen in previous sections that blood transports food, oxygenand waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about bloodbeing a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium calledplasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbondioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried bythe red blood cells. Many other substances like salts, are also transportedby the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood around thebody, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system in place to
ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged.
Science106The heart is a muscular organ which isas big as our fist (Fig. 6.10). Becauseboth oxygen and carbon dioxide have tobe transported by the blood, the heart
has different chambers to prevent the
oxygen-rich blood from mixing with theblood containing carbon dioxide. Thecarbon dioxide-rich blood has to reachthe lungs for the carbon dioxide to be
removed, and the oxygenated blood fromthe lungs has to be brought back to theheart. This oxygen-rich blood is then
pumped to the rest of the body.We can follow this process step bystep (Fig. 6.11). Oxygen-rich blood from
the lungs comes to the thin-walled upperchamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes
when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber,the left ventricle, expands, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the
muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to
the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper
chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it expands. As the right atriumcontracts, the corresponding lower chamber, the right ventricle, dilates.This transfers blood to the right ventricle, which in turn pumps it to thelungs for oxygenation. Since ventricles have to pump blood into various
organs, they have thicker muscular walls than the atria do. Valves ensurethat blood does not flow backwards when the atria or ventricles contract.Oxygen enters the blood in the lungs
The separation of the right side and the left side of
the heart is useful to keep oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood from mixing. Such separationallows a highly efficient supply of oxygen to the
body. This is useful in animals that have high
energy needs, such as birds and mammals, whichconstantly use energy to maintain their bodytemperature. In animals that do not use energy
for this purpose, the body temperature depends
on the temperature in the environment. Suchanimals, like amphibians or  many reptiles havethree-chambered hearts, and tolerate some mixingof the oxygenated and de-oxygenated bloodstreams. Fishes, on the other hand, have only two
chambers to their hearts, and the blood is pumpedto the gills, is oxygenated there, and passes directlyto the rest of the body. Thus, blood goes only once
through the heart in the fish during one cycle ofpassage through the body. On the other hand, it goes through the hearttwice during each cycle in other vertebrates. This is known as doublecirculation.Our pump Š the heartFigure 6.10Schematic sectional
view of the human heartFigure 6.11Schematic representation of transport and exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide
Life Processes107More to Know!Blood pressure is measured with an instrument called sphygmomanometer. Highblood pressure is also called hypertension and is caused by the constriction ofarterioles, which results in increased resistance to blood flow. It can lead to the ruptureof an artery and internal bleeding.Blood pressureThe force that blood exerts against the wall of a vessel is called blood pressure. Thispressure is much greater in arteries than in veins. The pressure of blood inside theartery during ventricular systole (contraction) is called systolic pressure and pressurein artery during ventricular diastole (relaxation) is called diastolic pressure. The normalsystolic pressure is about 120 mm of Hg and diastolic pressure is 80 mm of Hg.The tubes Œ blood vesselsArteries are the vessels which carry blood away from the heart to variousorgans of the body. Since the blood emerges from the heart under highpressure, the arteries have thick, elastic walls. Veins collect the bloodfrom different organs and bring it back to the heart. They do not needthick walls because the blood is no longer under pressure, instead theyhave valves that ensure that the blood flows only in one direction.On reaching an organ or tissue, the artery divides into smaller andsmaller vessels to bring the blood in contact with all the individual cells.The smallest vessels have walls which are one-cell thick and are calledcapillaries. Exchange of material between the blood and surroundingcells takes place across this thin wall. The capillaries then join togetherto form veins that convey the blood away from the organ or tissue.Maintenance by plateletsWhat happens if this system of tubes develops a leak? Think aboutsituations when we are injured and start bleeding. Naturally the loss ofblood from the system has to be minimised. In addition, leakage wouldlead to a loss of pressure which would reduce the efficiency of the
Science108pumping system. To avoid this, the blood has platelet cells which circulatearound the body and plug these leaks by helping to clot the blood atthese points of injury.LymphThere is another type of fluid also involved in transportation. This iscalled lymph or tissue fluid. Through the pores present in the walls ofcapillaries some amount of plasma, proteins and blood cells escape intointercellular spaces in the tissues to form the tissue fluid or lymph. It issimilar to the plasma of blood but colourless and contains less protein.Lymph drains into lymphatic capillaries from the intercellular spaces,which join to form large lymph vessels that finally open into larger veins.Lymph carries digested and absorbed fat from intestine and drains excessfluid from extra cellular space back into the blood.6.4.2 Transportation in PlantsWe have discussed earlier how plants take in simple compounds suchas CO2 and photosynthesise energy stored in their chlorophyll-containingorgans, namely leaves. The other kinds of raw materials needed forbuilding plant bodies will also have to be taken up separately. For plants,the soil is the nearest and richest source of raw materials like nitrogen,phosphorus and other minerals. The absorption of these substancestherefore occurs through the part in contact with the soil, namely roots.If the distances between soil-contacting organs and chlorophyll-containing organs are small, energy and raw materials can easily diffuseto all parts of the plant body. But if these distances become large because
of changes in plant body design, diffusion processes will not be sufficientto provide raw material in leaves and energy in roots. A proper system oftransportation is therefore essential in such situations.Energy needs differ between different body designs. Plants do notmove, and plant bodies have a large proportion of dead cells in manytissues. As a result, plants have low energy needs, and can use relativelyslow transport systems. The distances over which transport systemshave to operate, however, can be very large in plants such as very talltrees.Plant transport systems will move energy stores from leaves and rawmaterials from roots. These two pathways are constructed as
independently organised conducting tubes. One, the xylem  moves waterand minerals obtained from the soil. The other, phloem transportsproducts of photosynthesis from the leaves where they are synthesised
to other parts of the plant. We have studied the structure of these tissuesin detail in Class IX.Transport of waterIn xylem tissue, vessels and tracheids of the roots, stems and leaves areinterconnected to form a continuous system of water-conductingchannels reaching all parts of the plant. At the roots, cells in contact
with the soil actively take up ions. This creates a difference in theconcentration of these ions between the root and the soil. Water, therefore,
Life Processes109moves into the root from the soil to eliminate this difference. This meansthat there is steady movement of water into root xylem, creating a columnof water that is steadily pushed upwards.However, this pressure by itself is unlikely to be enough to movewater over the heights that we commonly see in plants. Plants use anotherstrategy to move water in the xylem upwards to the highest points of theplant body.Activity 6.8Activity 6.8Activity 6.8Activity 6.8Activity 6.8nTake two small pots of approximately the same size and havingthe same amount of soil. One should have a plant in it. Place astick of the same height as the plant in the other pot.nCover the soil in both pots with a plastic sheet so that moisturecannot escape by evaporation.nCover both sets, one with the plant and the other with the stick,
with plastic sheets and place in bright sunlight for half an hour.nDo you observe any difference in the two cases?Provided that the plant has an adequatesupply of water, the water which is lost through thestomata is replaced by water from the xylem vesselsin the leaf. In fact, evaporation of water molecules fromthe cells of a leaf creates a suction which pulls waterfrom the xylem cells of roots. The loss of water in theform of vapour from the aerial parts of the plant isknown as transpiration.Thus, transpiration helps in the absorption andupward movement of water and minerals dissolvedin it from roots to the leaves. It also helps intemperature regulation. The effect of root pressure intransport of water is more important at night. During
the day when the stomata are open, the transpirationpull becomes the major driving force in the movementof water in the xylem.Transport of food and other substancesSo far we have discussed the transport of water and minerals in plants.Now let us consider how the products of metabolic processes, particularlyphotosynthesis, are moved from leaves, where they are formed, to otherparts of the plant. This transport of soluble products of photosynthesisis called translocation and it occurs in the part of the vascular tissueknown as phloem. Besides the products of photosynthesis, the phloemtransports amino acids and other substances. These substances areespecially delivered to the storage organs of roots, fruits and seeds andto growing organs. The translocation of food and other substances takesplace in the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells bothin upward and downward directions.Unlike transport in xylem which can be largely explained by simplephysical forces, the translocation in phloem is achieved by utilisingFigure 6.12Movement of water during transpiration in a tree
Science110energy. Material like sucrose is transferred into phloem tissue usingenergy from ATP. This increases the osmotic pressure of the tissuecausing water to move into it. This pressure moves the material in the
phloem to tissues which have less pressure. This allows the phloem tomove material according to the plant™s needs. For example, in the spring,sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the budswhich need energy to grow.QUESTIONS?1.What are the components of the transport system in human beings?What are the functions of these components?2.Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood inmammals and birds?3.What are the components of the transport system in highly organisedplants?4.How are water and minerals transported in plants?5.How is food transported in plants?6.5 EX6.5 EX6.5 EX6.5 EX6.5 EXCRETIONCRETIONCRETIONCRETIONCRETIONWe have already discussed how organisms get rid of gaseous wastesgenerated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activitiesgenerate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological
process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from
the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to
do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simplediffusion from the body surface into the surrounding
water. As we have seen in other processes, complexmulti-cellular organisms use specialised organs to
perform the same function.6.5.1 Excretion in Human BeingsThe excretory system of human beings (Fig. 6.13)
includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the
abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine
produced in the kidneys passes through the uretersinto the urinary bladder where it is stored until it isreleased through the urethra.How is urine produced? The purpose of makingurine is to filter out waste products from the blood.Just as CO2 is removed from the blood in the lungs,nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid areremoved from blood in the kidneys. It is then nosurprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys,Figure 6.13Excretory system in human beings
Life Processes111like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled bloodcapillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney isassociated with the cup-shaped end of a tube thatcollects the filtered urine (Fig. 6.14). Each kidney has
large numbers of these filtration units called nephrons
packed close together. Some substances in the initialfiltrate, such as glucose, amino acids, salts and a major
amount of water, are selectively re-absorbed as theurine flows along the tube. The amount of water re-
absorbed depends on how much excess water there is
in the body, and on how much of dissolved waste there
is to be excreted. The urine forming in each kidney
eventually enters a long tube, the ureter, whichconnects the kidneys with the urinary bladder. Urineis stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure of
the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it isunder nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As a result, we can usually control the urge to urinate.More to Know!Artificial kidney (Hemodialysis)Kidneys are vital organs for survival. Several factors like infections, injury or restrictedblood flow to kidneys reduce the activity of kidneys. This leads to accumulation ofpoisonous wastes in the body, which can even lead to death. In case of kidneyfailure, an artificial kidney can be used. An artificial kidney is a device to removenitrogenous waste products from the blood through dialysis.Artificial kidneys contain a number of tubes with a semi-permeable lining, suspendedin a tank filled with dialysing fluid.This fluid has the same osmoticpressure as blood, except that it isdevoid of nitrogenous wastes. Thepatient™s blood is passed throughthese tubes. During this passage,the waste products from the bloodpass into dialysing fluid by diffusion.The purified blood is pumped backinto the patient. This is similar to thefunction of the kidney, but it isdifferent since there is no re-absorption involved. Normally, in ahealthy adult, the initial filtrate in thekidneys is about 180 L daily.However, the volume actuallyexcreted is only a litre or two a day,
because the remaining filtrate is re-absorbed in the kidney tubules.Figure 6.14Structure of a nephron
Science1126.5.2 Excretion in PlantsPlants use completely different strategies for excretion than those ofanimals. Oxygen itself can be thought of as a waste product generatedduring photosynthesis! We have discussed earlier how plants deal withoxygen as well as CO2. They can get rid of excess water by transpiration.For other wastes, plants use the fact that many of their tissues consist ofdead cells, and that they can even lose some parts such as leaves. Manyplant waste products are stored in cellular vacuoles. Waste productsmay be stored in leaves that fall off. Other waste products are stored as
resins and gums, especially in old xylem. Plants also excrete some wastesubstances into the soil around them.QUESTIONS?1.Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons.2.What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products?3.How is the amount of urine produced regulated?What you have learntnMovement of various types can be taken as an indication of life.nThe maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport ofmaterials within the body and excretion of waste products.nAutotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from theenvironment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complexhigh-energy organic material.nHeterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by otherorganisms.nIn human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along thealimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sentto all cells in the body.nDuring the process of respiration, complex organic compounds such as glucoseare broken down to provide energy in the form of ATP. ATP is used to provideenergy for other reactions in the cell.nRespiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy
available to the organism.nIn human beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, foodand excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatorysystem consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels.nIn highly differentiated plants, transport of water, minerals, food and other materialsis a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem.
Life Processes113nIn human beings, excretory products in the form of soluble nitrogen compoundsare removed by the nephrons in the kidneys.nPlants use a variety of techniques to get rid of waste material. For example, wastematerial may be stored in the cell-vacuoles or as gum and resin, removed in thefalling leaves, or excreted into the surrounding soil.EXERCISES1.The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for(a)nutrition.(b)respiration.(c)excretion.(d)transportation.2.The xylem in plants are responsible for(a)transport of water.(b)transport of food.(c)transport of amino acids.(d)transport of oxygen.3.The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires(a)carbon dioxide and water.(b)chlorophyll.(c)sunlight.(d)all of the above.4.The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place in(a)cytoplasm.(b)mitochondria.(c)chloroplast.(d)nucleus.5.How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place?6.What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food?7.What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic nutrition and what are its by-products?8.What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name some
organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.9.How are the alveoli designed to maximise the exchange of gases?10.What would be the consequences of a deficiency of haemoglobin in our bodies?11.Describe double circulation in human beings. Why is it necessary?12.What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and phloem?13.Compare the functioning of alveoli in the lungs and nephrons in the kidneys with
respect to their structure and functioning.
