Science142Figure 9.1Creation of diversity over succeeding
generations. The original organism at the top

will give rise to, say, two individuals, similar
in body design, but with subtle differences.
Each of them, in turn, will give rise to two
individuals in the next generation. Each of
the four individuals in the bottom row will be

different from each other. While some of these

differences will be unique, others will be

inherited from their respective parents, who

were different from each other.
Heredity and
Evolution9CHAPTERWe have seen that reproductive processes give rise to new individuals
that are similar, but subtly different. We have discussed how some
amount of variation is produced even during asexual reproduction. And
the number of successful variations are maximised by the process ofsexual reproduction. If we observe a field of sugarcane we find very littlevariations among the individual plants. But in a number of animals
including human beings, which reproduce sexually, quite distinct
variations are visible among different individuals. In this chapter, we
shall be studying the mechanism by which variations are created and
inherited. The long-term consequences of the accumulation of variations
are also an interesting point to be considered. We shall be studying this
under evolution.9.19.19.19.19.1AAAAACCUMULCCUMULCCUMULCCUMULCCUMULAAAAATION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF VARIAARIAARIAARIAARIATIONTIONTIONTIONTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONInheritance from the previous generation provides botha common basic body design, and subtle changes in it,

for the next generation. Now think about what wouldhappen when this new generation, in its turn,reproduces. The second generation will have differences
that they inherit from the first generation, as well as
newly created differences (Fig. 9.1).Figure 9.1 would represent the situation if a singleindividual reproduces, as happens in asexualreproduction. If one bacterium divides, and then theresultant two bacteria divide again, the four individual

bacteria generated would be very similar. There would
be only very minor differences between them, generated
due to small inaccuracies in DNA copying. However, if

sexual reproduction is involved, even greater diversity
will be generated, as we will see when we discuss therules of inheritance.Do all these variations in a species have equalchances of surviving in the environment in which they
find themselves? Obviously not. Depending on the
nature of variations, different individuals would have
Heredity and Evolution1439.2 HEREDITY9.2 HEREDITY9.2 HEREDITY9.2 HEREDITY9.2 HEREDITYThe most obvious outcome of the reproductive process still remains the
generation of individuals of similar design. The rules of heredity determinethe process by which traits and characteristics are reliably inherited. Letus take a closer look at these rules.9.2.1 Inherited Traits
What exactly do we mean by similarities and differences? We know that

a child bears all the basic features of a human being. However, it does
not look exactly like its parents, and human populations show a greatdeal of variation.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.If a trait A exists in 10% of a population of an asexually reproducing
species and a trait B exists in 60% of the same population, which trait
is likely to have arisen earlier?2.How does the creation of variations in a species promote survival?
Activity 9.1Activity 9.1Activity 9.1Activity 9.1Activity 9.1Observe the ears of all the students in the class. Prepare a list ofstudents having free or attached earlobes and calculate the

percentage of students having each (Fig. 9.2). Find out about theearlobes of the parents of each student in the class. Correlate theearlobe type of each student with that of their parents. Based on
this evidence, suggest a possible rule for the inheritance of earlobetypes.9.2.2Rules f
or the Inheritance of Traits 
ŒŒŒŒŒMendel™s ContributionsThe rules for inheritance of such traits in human beings are related tothe fact that both the father and the mother contribute practically equalamounts of genetic material to the child. This means that each trait can
be influenced by both paternal and maternal DNA. Thus, for each traitthere will be two versions in each child. What will, then, the trait seen inthe child be? Mendel (see box) worked out the main rules of such

inheritance, and it is interesting to look at some of his experiments from
more than a century ago.Figure 9.2(a) Free and (b) attached
earlobes. The lowest part
of the ear, called the

earlobe, is closely attached

to the side of the head in
some of us, and not
in others. Free and
attached earlobes are two
variants found in human

populations.different kinds of advantages. Bacteria that can withstand heat will survivebetter in a heat wave, as we have discussed earlier. Selection of variants
by environmental factors forms the basis for evolutionary processes, as
we will discuss in later sections.(a)(b)
Science144Mendel used a number of contrasting visible characters of gardenpeas Œ round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and
so on.  He took pea plants with different characteristics Œ a tall plant and

a short plant, produced progeny from them, and calculated the

percentages of tall or short progeny.In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this first-generation, or F1 progeny Œ no ‚medium-height™ plants. All plants weretall. This meant that only one of the parental traits
was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next

question was, were the tall plants in the F1
generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the

parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this
by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall

plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny
of the parental plants are, of course, all tall. However,
the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F1 tall
plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them

are short. This indicates that both the tallness and

shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but
only the tallness trait was expressed. Thus, two
copies of the trait are inherited in each sexuallyreproducing organism. These two may be identical,
or may be different, depending on the parentage. A
pattern of inheritance can be worked out with this
assumption, as shown in Fig. 9.3.Gregor Johann Mendel (1822Œ1884)Mendel was educated in a monastery and went on to study science and
mathematics at the University of Vienna. Failure in the examinations for a
teaching certificate did not suppress his zeal for scientific quest. He went
back to his monastery and started growing peas. Many others had studied
the inheritance of traits in peas and other organisms earlier, but Mendel

blended his knowledge of science and mathematics and was the first one
to keep count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation.
This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance that we have discussed
in the main text.Figure 9.3
Inheritance of traits
over two generationsActivity 9.2Activity 9.2Activity 9.2Activity 9.2Activity 9.2In Fig. 9.3, what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2generation did in fact have a 1:2:1 ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait
combinations?In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only tt is ashort plant. In other words, a single copy of ‚T™ is enough to make the
plant tall, while both copies have to be ‚t™ for the plant to be short. Traits

like ‚T™ are called dominant traits, while those that behave like ‚t™ are
called recessive traits. Work out which trait would be considered

dominant and which one recessive in Fig. 9.4.
Heredity and Evolution145What happens when pea plants showing two differentcharacteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other?

What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a shortplant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and haveround seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits.
But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generateF2 progeny by self-pollination? A Mendelian experiment will findthat some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some

were short plants with wrinkled seeds.  However, there would
also be some F2 progeny that showed new mixtures. Some of
them would be tall, but have wrinkled seeds, while others would
be short, but have round seeds. Thus, the tall/short trait andthe round seed/wrinkled seed trait are independently inherited.
Another example is shown in Fig. 9.5.9.2.3 How do these Traits get Expressed?
How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA isthe information source for making proteins in the cell. Asection of DNA that provides information for one protein is
called the gene for that protein. How do proteins control thecharacteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take theexample of tallness as a characteristic. We know that plants

have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height canthus depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone.
The amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now anenzyme that is important for this process. If this enzymeworks efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the

plant will be tall. If the gene for that enzyme has an alterationthat makes the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormonewill be less, and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control

characteristics, or traits.
If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we havebeen discussing are correct, then both parents must be
contributing equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexualreproduction. We have disscussed this issue in the previous
Chapter. If both parents can help determine the trait in the

progeny, both parents must be contributing a copy of the samegene. This means that each pea plant must have two sets of all
genes, one inherited from each parent. For this mechanism to
work, each germ cell must have only one gene set.
How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from thenormal two copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants
inherited a single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment
in Fig. 9.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‚R™ and‚y™ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independentlyinherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not
Figure 9.4Figure 9.5Independent inheritance
of two separate traits,
shape and colour of seeds
Science146as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces,
each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of eachchromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germ-
cell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of eithermaternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they willrestore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring
the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance
explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all
sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms
also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how theirinheritance might work?9.2.4 Sex Determination
We have discussed the idea that the two sexes participating in sexual

reproduction must be somewhat different from each other for a numberof reasons. How is the sex of a newborn individual
determined? Different species use very different strategiesfor this. Some rely entirely on environmental cues. Thus,in some animals, the temperature at which fertilised eggs
are kept determines whether the animals developing inthe eggs will be male or female. In other animals, such assnails, individuals can change sex, indicating that sex is
not genetically determined. However, in human beings,
the sex of the individual is largely genetically determined.In other words, the genes inherited from our parents
decide whether we will be boys or girls. But so far, we
have assumed that similar gene sets are inherited from
both parents. If that is the case, how can geneticinheritance determine sex?The explanation lies in the fact that all humanchromosomes are not paired. Most human chromosomeshave a maternal and a paternal copy, and we have 22such pairs. But one pair, called the sex chromosomes, is

odd in not always being a perfect pair. Women have a
perfect pair of sex chromosomes, both called X. But menhave a mismatched pair in which one is a normal-sized X

while the other is a short one called Y. So women are XX,
while men are XY. Now, can we work out what the
inheritance pattern of X and Y will be?
As Fig. 9.6 shows, half the children will be boys andhalf will be girls. All children will inherit an X chromosomefrom their mother regardless of whether they are boys or
girls. Thus, the sex of the children will be determined bywhat they inherit from their father. A child who inherits
an X chromosome from her father will be a girl, and one

who inherits a Y chromosome from him will be a boy.Figure 9.6Sex determination in
human beings
Heredity and Evolution1479.3 EVOLUTIONWe have noted that there is an inbuilt tendency to variation during
reproduction, both because of errors in DNA copying, and as a result of
sexual reproduction. Let us now look at some consequences of this

tendency.9.3.1 An IllustrationConsider a group of twelve red beetles. They live, let us assume, in somebushes with green leaves. Their population will grow by sexual
reproduction, and therefore, can generate variations. Let us imagine also
that crows eat these beetles. The more beetles the crows eat, the fewer
beetles are available to reproduce. Now, let us think about some different
situations (Fig. 9.7) that can develop in this beetle population.
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.How do Mendel™s experiments show that traits may be dominant or
recessive?2.How do Mendel™s experiments show that traits are inherited
independently?3.A man with blood group A marries a woman with blood group O and
their daughter has blood group O. Is this information enough to tell you

which of the traits Œ blood group A or O Œ is dominant? Why or why not?4.How is the sex of the child determined in human beings?
Figure 9.7
 Variations in a population Œ inherited and otherwise
In the first situation, a colour variation arises during reproduction,
so that there is one beetle that is green in colour instead of red. This
beetle, moreover, can pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all its

Science148progeny beetles are green. Crows cannot see green-coloured beetles onthe green leaves of the bushes, and therefore cannot eat them. What

happens then? The progeny of green beetles is not eaten, while the

progeny of red beetles continues to be eaten. As a result, there are more
and more green beetles than red ones in the beetle population.In a second situation, again, a colour variation arises duringreproduction, but now it results in a beetle that is blue in colour instead

of red. This beetle can also pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all
its progeny beetles are blue. Crows can see blue-coloured beetles in the
green leaves of the bushes as well as they can see red ones, and therefore
can eat them. What happens initially? In the population, as it expands,
there are a few blue beetles, but most are red. But at this point, an
elephant comes by, and stamps on the bushes where the beetles live.

This kills most of the beetles. By chance, the few beetles that have survived

are mostly blue. The beetle population slowly expands again, but now,
the beetles in the population are mostly blue.
It is obvious that in both situations, what started out as a rare variation
came to be a common characteristic in the population. In other words,
the frequency of an inherited trait changed over generations. Since genes
control traits, we can say that the frequency of certain genes in a
population changed over generations. This is the essence of the idea of
evolution.But there are interesting differences, too, in the two situations. In thefirst case, the variation became common because it gave a survival
advantage. In other words, it was naturally selected. We can see that the

natural selection is exerted by the crows. The more crows there are, themore red beetles would be eaten, and the more the proportion of greenbeetles in the population would be. Thus, natural selection is directing

evolution in the beetle population. It results in adaptations in the beetle
population to fit their environment better.
In the second situation, the colour change gave no survival advantage.Instead, it was simply a matter of accidental survival of beetles of onecolour that changed the common characteristic of the resultantpopulation. The elephant would not have caused such major havoc in

the beetle population if the beetle population had been very large. So,accidents in small populations can change the frequency of some genesin a population, even if they give no survival advantage. This is the notion
of genetic drift, which provides diversity without any adaptations.
Now consider a third situation. In this, as the beetle population beginsto expand, the bushes start suffering from a plant disease. The amount
of leaf material for the beetles is reduced. The beetles are poorly nourishedas a result. The average weight of adult beetles decreases from what it
used to be when leaves were plentiful, but there is no genetic change
occurring. After a few years and a few beetle generations of such scarcity,the plant disease is eliminated. There is a lot of leaf food. At this time,what would we expect the weight of the beetles to be?
Heredity and Evolution1499.3.2 Acquired and Inherited Traits
We discussed the idea that the germ cells of sexually reproducing
populations are made in specialised reproductive tissue. If the weight of
the beetle is reduced because of starvation, that will not change the DNA
of the germ cells. Therefore, low weight is not a trait that can be inherited
by the progeny of a starving beetle. Therefore, even if some generations

of beetles are low in weight because of starvation, that is not an example
of evolution, since the change is not inherited over generations. Change
in non-reproductive tissues cannot be passed on to the DNA of the germ
cells. Therefore the experiences of an individual during its lifetime cannot
be passed on to its progeny, and cannot direct evolution.
Consider another example of how an individual cannot pass on toits progeny the experiences of its lifetime. If we breed a group of mice, all
their progeny will have tails, as expected. Now, if the tails of these mice

are removed by surgery in each generation, do these tailless mice have
tailless progeny? The answer is no, and it makes sense because removal
of the tail cannot change the genes of the germ cells of the mice.Charles Robert Darwin (1809Œ1882)Charles Darwin set out on a voyage when he was 22 years old. The

five-year voyage took him to South America and the islands off its coast.

The studies that he conducted during this voyage were to change forever
the way we look at the variety of life on earth. Interestingly, after he got
back to England, he never left its shores again. He stayed at home and
conducted various experiments that led him to formulate his hypothesis
that evolution took place due to natural selection. He did not know the
mechanism whereby variations arose in the species. He would have
been enlightened by Mendel™s experiments, but these two gentlemen

did not know of each other or their work!
We often associate Darwin solely with the theory of evolution. But he was an accomplished

naturalist, and one of the studies he conducted was to do with the role of earthworms in
soil fertility.This is the reason why the ideas of heredity and genetics that wehave discussed earlier are so essential for understanding evolution. Even
Charles Darwin, who came up with the idea of evolution of species by
natural selection in the nineteenth century, could not work out the
mechanism. It is ironic that he could have done so if he had seen the
significance of the experiments his Austrian contemporary, Gregor
Mendel, was doing. But then, Mendel too did not notice Darwin™s work
as relevant to his!Origin of life on earth
Darwin™s theory of evolution tells us how life evolved from simple to more complex formsand Mendel™s experiments give us the mechanism for the inheritance of traits from one

generation to the next. But neither tells us anything about how life began on earth in the

first place.
Science150QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.What are the different ways in which individuals with a particular
trait may increase in a population?
2.Why are traits acquired during the life-time of an individual not
inherited?3.Why are the small numbers of surviving tigers a cause of worry from
the point of view of genetics?9.4 SPECIA9.4 SPECIA9.4 SPECIA9.4 SPECIA9.4 SPECIATIONTIONTIONTIONTIONWhat we have seen so far is micro-evolution. That means that the changesare small, even though they are significant. Also, they simply change the
common characteristics of a particular species. But this does not properly
explain how new species come into existence. That can be said to have
happened only if this group of beetles we are thinking about, splits into

two populations that cannot reproduce with each other. When this

happens, they can be called two independent species. So, can we extend

the reasoning we have used above to explain such speciation?
Consider what would happen if the bushes the beetles feed on arespread widely over a mountain range. The beetle population becomes
very large as a result. But individual beetles feed mostly on a few nearby
bushes throughout their lifetime. They do not travel far. So, in this huge

population of beetles, there will be sub-populations in neighbourhoods.
Since male and female beetles have to meet for reproduction to happen,
most reproduction will be within these sub-populations. Of course, an
occasional adventurous beetle might go from one site to another. Or a

beetle is picked up by a crow from one site and dropped in the other site
without being eaten. In either case, the migrant beetle will reproduce
with the local population. This will result in the genes of the migrant

beetle entering a new population. This kind of gene flow is bound toJ.B.S. Haldane, a British scientist (who became a citizen of India later), suggested in
1929 that life must have developed from the simple inorganic molecules which were
present on earth soon after it was formed. He speculated that the conditions on earth
at that time, which were far from the  conditions we see today, could have given rise to

more complex organic molecules that were necessary for life. The first primitive
organisms would arise from further chemical synthesis.
How did these organic molecules arise? An answer was suggested by the experiment
conducted by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey in 1953. They assembled an
atmosphere similar to that thought to exist on early earth (this had molecules like
ammonia, methane and hydrogen sulphide, but no oxygen) over water. This was

maintained at a temperature just below 100°C and sparks were passed through the
mixture of gases to simulate lightning. At the end of a week, 15% of the carbon (from
methane) had been converted to simple compounds of carbon including amino acids
which make up protein molecules. So, can life arise afresh on earth even now?
Do You Know?

Heredity and Evolution151happen between populations that are partly, but not completelyseparated. If, however, between two such sub-populations a large river

comes into existence, the two populations will be further isolated. The
levels of gene flow between them will decrease even further.
Over generations, genetic drift will accumulate different changes ineach sub-population. Also, natural selection may also operate differently

in these different geographic locations. Thus, for example, in the territory
of one sub-population, crows are eliminated by eagles. But this does
not happen for the other sub-population, where crow numbers are very
high. As a result, the green variation will not be selected at the first site,
while it will be strongly selected at the second.Together, the processes of genetic drift and natural selection will result
in these two isolated sub-populations of beetles becoming more and

more different from each other. Eventually, members of these two groups

will be incapable of reproducing with each other even if they happen to
meet.There can be a number of ways by which this can happen. If theDNA changes are severe enough, such as a change in the number of
chromosomes, eventually the germ cells of the two groups cannot fuse
with each other. Or a new variation emerges in which green females will

not mate with red males, but only with green males. This allows very
strong natural selection for greenness. Now, if such a green female beetle
meets a red male from the other group, her behaviour will ensure that
there is no reproduction between them. Effectively, new species of beetles

are being generated.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.What factors could lead to the rise of a new species?
2.Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of a self-
pollinating plant species? Why or why not?
3.Will geographical isolation be a major factor in the speciation of an
organism that reproduces asexually? Why or why not?9.5 EV9.5 EV9.5 EV9.5 EV9.5 EVOLUTION AND CLOLUTION AND CLOLUTION AND CLOLUTION AND CLOLUTION AND CLASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICAAAAATIONTIONTIONTIONTIONBased on these principles, we can work out the evolutionary relationshipsof the species we see around us. It is a sort of going backwards in time.
We can do this by identifying hierarchies of characteristics between

species. In order to understand this process, let us think back to our
discussion on the classification of organisms in Class IX.
Similarities among organisms will allow us to group them and thenstudy the groups. For this, which characteristics decide more
fundamental differences among organisms, and which ones decide less
basic differences? What is meant by ‚characteristics™, anyway?
Characteristics are details of appearance or behaviour; in other words, a
particular form or a particular function. That we have four limbs is thus a

characteristic. That plants can do photosynthesis is also a characteristic.
Science152Some basic characteristics will be shared by most organisms. Thecell is the basic unit of life in all organisms. The characteristics in the
next level of classification would be shared by most, but not all organisms.A basic characteristic of cell design that differs among different organismsis whether the cell has a nucleus. Bacterial cells do not, while the cells of
most other organisms do. Among organisms with nucleated cells, which
ones are unicellular and which ones multi-cellular? That property marks
a very basic difference in body design, because of specialisation of cell
types and tissues. Among multi-cellular organisms, whether they canundertake photosynthesis or not will provide the next level ofclassification. Among the multi-cellular organisms that cannot do

photosynthesis, whether the skeleton is inside the body or around thebody will mark another fundamental design difference. We can see that,
even in these few questions that we have asked, a hierarchy is developing
that allows us to make classification groups.The more characteristics two species will have in common, the moreclosely they are related. And the more closely they are related, the more
recently they will have had a common ancestor. An example will help. A
brother and a sister are closely related. They have common ancestors inthe first generation before them, namely, their parents. A girl and her
first cousin are also related, but less than the girl and her brother. This
is because cousins have common ancestors, their grandparents, in thesecond generation before them, not in the first one. We can now appreciate

that classification of species is in fact a reflection of their evolutionary

relationship.We can thus build up small groups of species with recent common
ancestors, then super-groups of these groups with more distant common

ancestors, and so on. In theory, we can keep going backwards like thisuntil we come to the notion of a single species at the very beginning ofevolutionary time. If that is the case, then at some point in the history of
the earth, non-living material must have given rise to life. There are manytheories about how this might have happened. It would be interesting to
come up with theories of our own!9.5.1 Tracing Evolutionary Relationships
When we try to follow evolutionary relationships, how do we identify
characteristics as common? These characteristics in different organisms

would be similar because they are inherited from a common ancestor.
As an example, consider  the fact that mammals have four limbs, as do
birds, reptiles and amphibians (Fig. 9.8). The basic structure of the limbs
is similar though it has been modified to perform different functions invarious vertebrates. Such a homologous characteristic helps to identifyan evolutionary relationship between apparently different species.
However, all similarities simply in organ shape are not necessarily
because of common ancestry. What would we think about the wings of
Figure 9.8
Homologous organs
Heredity and Evolution153Figure 9.9Analogous organs Œ The wing of a bat and the
wing of a birdbirds and bats, for example (Fig. 9.9)? Birds
and bats have wings, but squirrels and
lizards do not. So are birds and bats more
closely related to each other than to squirrels
or lizards?Before we jump to this conclusion, let uslook at the wings of birds and bats more
closely. When we do that, we find that the

wings of bats are skin folds stretched mainly
between elongated fingers. But the wings of
birds are a feathery covering all along the arm. The designs of the two
wings, their structure and components, are thus very different. They
look similar because they have a common use for flying, but their origins
are not common. This makes them analogous characteristics, rather

than homologous characteristics. It would now be interesting to think
about whether bird arms and bat arms should be considered homologous

or analogous!9.5.2 FossilsSuch studies of organ structure can be done not only on current species,

but also on species that are no longer alive. How do we know that these

extinct species ever existed? We know this from finding fossils (Fig. 9.10).

What are fossils? Usually, when organisms die, their bodies will
decompose and be lost. But every once in a while, the body or at least
some parts may be in an environment that does not let it decompose
completely. If a dead insect gets caught in hot mud, for example, it will
not decompose quickly, and the mud will eventually harden and retain

the impression of the body parts of the insect. All such preserved traces

of living organisms are called fossils.Figure 9.10 
Various kind of fossils. Note the different appearances and degrees of detail and preservation.
The dinosaur skull fossil shown was found only a few years ago in the Narmada valley.

Science154How do we know how old the fossils are? There are two components
to this estimation. One is relative. If we dig into the earth and start finding

fossils, it is reasonable to suppose that the fossils we find closer to the
surface are more recent than the fossils we find in deeper layers. The
second way of dating fossils is by detecting the ratios of different isotopes
of the same element in the fossil material. It would be interesting to find

out exactly how this method works!Let us start 100 million years ago. Some invertebrates on
the sea-bed die, and are buried in the sand. More sand
accumulates, and sandstone forms under pressure.Millions of years later, dinosaurs living in the area die, and their bodies, too, are

buried in mud. This mud is also compressed into rock, above the rock containing

the earlier invertebrate fossils.Again millions of years later, the bodies of horse-like creatures dying in the area are

fossilised in rocks above these earlier rocks.Much later, by erosion or water flow wears away some of the rock and exposes the

horse-like fossils. As we dig deeper, we will find older and older fossils.
Do You Know?
How do fossils form layer by layer?
Heredity and Evolution155Figure 9.11A flatworm named Planaria has very simple
‚eyes™ that are really just eye-spots which
detect light.9.5.3 Evolution by StagesA question that arises here is Œ if complicated organs,such as the eye, are selected for the advantage theyprovide, how can they be generated by a single DNAchange? Surely such complex organs will be created

bit-by-bit over generations? But how can eachintermediate change be selected for? There are a
number of possible explanations. Even an
intermediate stage (Fig. 9.11), such as a rudimentaryeye, can be useful to some extent. This might be
enough to give a fitness advantage. In fact, the eye Œ

like the wing Œ seems to be a very popular adaptation.
Insects have them, so does an octopus, and so dovertebrates. And the structure of the eye in each of
these organisms is different Œ enough for them to haveseparate evolutionary origins.Also, a change that is useful for one property tostart with can become useful later for quite a differentfunction. Feathers, for example, can start out asproviding insulation in cold weather (Fig. 9.12). But
later, they might become useful for flight. In fact,
some dinosaurs had feathers, although they couldnot fly using the feathers. Birds seem to have later
adapted the feathers to flight. This, of course, means
that birds are very closely related to reptiles, sincedinosaurs were reptiles!It is all very well to say that very dissimilar-
looking structures evolve from a common ancestraldesign. It is true that analysis of the organ structure
in fossils allows us to make estimates of how far backevolutionary relationships go. But those are guesses
about what happened in history. Are there any

current examples of such a process? The wildcabbage plant is a good example. Humans have, overmore than two thousand years, cultivated wild
cabbage as a food plant, and generated different
vegetables from it by selection (
see Fig. 9.13). This is,of course, artificial selection rather than natural

selection. So some farmers have wanted to select forvery short distances between leaves, and have bredthe cabbage we eat. Some have wanted to select for
arrested flower development, and have bred broccoli,
or for sterile flowers, and have made the cauliflower. Some have selected
for swollen parts, and come up with kohlrabi. Some have simply looked
for slightly larger leaves, and come up with a leafy vegetable called kale.Would we have thought that all these structures are descended from the
same ancestor if we had not done it ourselves?Figure 9.12Dinosaurs and the evolution of feathers
Science156Another way of tracing evolutionary relationships depends on theoriginal idea that we started with. That idea was that changes in DNA
during reproduction are the basic events in evolution. If that is the case,
then comparing the DNA of different species should give us a direct estimate
of how much the DNA has changed during the formation of these species.

This method is now extensively used to define evolutionary relationships.Molecular phylogenyWe have been discussing how changes in the DNA during cell division would lead to changes
in the proteins that are made from this new DNA. Another point that has been made is that
these changes would accumulate from one generation to the next. Could this be used to
trace the changes in DNA backwards in time and find out where each change divergedfrom the other? Molecular phylogeny does exactly this. This approach is based on the ideathat organisms which are more distantly related will accumulate a greater number of

differences in their DNA. Such studies trace the evolutionary relationships and it has beenhighly gratifying to find that the relationships among different organisms shown by molecularphylogeny match the classification scheme that we learnt in Class IX.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Give an example of characteristics being used to determine how close
two species are in evolutionary terms.2.Can the wing of a butterfly and the wing of a bat be considered
homologous organs? Why or why not?3.What are fossils? What do they tell us about the process of evolution?
9.6 EV9.6 EV9.6 EV9.6 EV9.6 EVOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUAOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUAOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUAOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUAOLUTION SHOULD NOT BE EQUA
TED WITHTED WITHTED WITHTED WITHTED WITH‚PROGRESS™‚PROGRESS™‚PROGRESS™‚PROGRESS™‚PROGRESS™In an exercise of tracing the family trees of species, we need to remembercertain things. Firstly, there are multiple branches possible at each andMore to Know!
Figure 9.13 Evolution of wild cabbage!

Heredity and Evolution157every stage of this process. So it is not as if one species is eliminated togive rise to a new one. A new species has emerged. But that does not

necessarily mean, like the beetle example we have been thinking about,
that the old species will disappear. It will all depend on the environment.

Also, it is not as if the newly generated species are in any way ‚better™
than the older one. It is just that natural selection and genetic drift have
together led to the formation of a population that cannot reproduce with
the original one. So, for example, it is not true that human beings have
evolved from chimpanzees. Rather, both human beings and chimpanzees

have a common ancestor a long time ago. That common ancestor is likely
to have been neither human or chimpanzee. Also, the first step of
separation from that ancestor is unlikely to have resulted in modern
chimpanzees and human beings. Instead, the two resultant species have
probably evolved in their own separate ways to give rise to the current

forms.In fact, there is no real ‚progress™ in the idea of evolution. Evolution issimply the generation of diversity and the shaping of the diversity by
environmental selection. The only progressive trend in evolution seems
to be that more and more complex body designs have emerged over
time. However, again, it is not as if the older designs are inefficient! So

many of the older and simpler designs still survive. In fact, one of the
simplest life forms Œ bacteria Œ inhabit the most inhospitable habitats
like hot springs, deep-sea thermal vents and the ice in Antarctica. In
other words, human beings are not the pinnacle of evolution, but simply
yet another species in the teeming spectrum of evolving life.
9.6.1 Human EvolutionThe same tools for tracing evolutionary
relationships Œ excavating, time-dating
and studying fossils, as well as
determining DNA sequences Œ have
been used for studying human
evolution. There is a great diversity of
human forms and features across the
planet. So much so that, for a long time,
people used to talk about human
‚races™. Skin colour used to be the
commonest way of identifying these so-
called races. Some were called yellow,
some black, white or brown. A major question debated for a long time

was, have these apparent groups evolved differently? Over recent years,
the evidence has become very clear. The answer is that there is no

biological basis to the notion of human races. All humans are a single
species.Not only that, regardless of where we have lived for the past few
thousand years, we all come from Africa. The earliest members of the
human species, Homo sapiens, can be traced there. Our geneticfootprints can be traced back to our African roots. A couple of hundred
thousand years ago, some of our ancestors left Africa while others stayedFigure 9.14
Evolution Š
Ladder versus Tree

Science158What you have learnt
on. While the residents spread across Africa, the migrants slowly spreadacross the planet Œ  from Africa to West Asia, then to Central Asia, Eurasia,

South Asia, East Asia. They travelled down the islands of Indonesia and
the Philippines to Australia, and they crossed the Bering land bridge to
the Americas. They did not go in a single line, so they were not travelling
for the sake of travelling, obviously. They went forwards and backwards,

with groups sometimes separating from each other, sometimes coming

back to mix with each other, even moving in and out of Africa. Like all

other species on the planet, they had come into being as an accident of
evolution, and were trying to live their lives the best they could.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Why are human beings who look so different from each other in terms
of size, colour and looks said to belong to the same species?2.In evolutionary terms, can we say which among bacteria, spiders, fish
and chimpanzees have a ‚better™ body design? Why or why not?
Variations arising during the process of reproduction can be inherited.
These variations may lead to increased survival of the individuals.Sexually reproducing individuals have two copies of genes for the same trait. If thecopies are not identical, the trait that gets expressed is called the dominant trait
and the other is called the recessive trait.
Traits in one individual may be inherited separately, giving rise to new combinations

of traits in the offspring of sexual reproduction.
Sex is determined by different factors in various species. In human beings, the sex
of the child depends on whether the paternal chromosome is X (for girls) or Y (for
boys).Variations in the species may confer survival advantages or merely contribute to

the genetic drift.Changes in the non-reproductive tissues caused by environmental factors are not
inheritable.Speciation may take place when variation is combined with geographical isolation.
Evolutionary relationships are traced in the classification of organisms.Tracing common ancestors back in time leads us to the idea that at some point of

time, non-living material must have given rise to life.Evolution can be worked out by the study of not just living species, but also fossils.
Complex organs may have evolved because of the survival advantage of even the
intermediate stages.Organs or features may be adapted to new functions during the course of evolution.
For example, feathers are thought to have been initially evolved for warmth and
later adapted for flight.
Heredity and Evolution159Evolution cannot be said to ‚progress™ from ‚lower™ forms to ‚higher™ forms. Rather,
evolution seems to have given rise to more complex body designs even while the

simpler body designs continue to flourish.Study of the evolution of human beings indicates that all of us belong to a single

species that evolved in Africa and spread across the world in stages.1.A Mendelian experiment consisted of breeding tall pea plants bearing violet flowers
with short pea plants bearing white flowers. The progeny all bore violet flowers,
but almost half of them were short. This suggests that the genetic make-up of the

tall parent can be depicted as(a)TTWW
(b)TTww
(c)TtWW
(d)TtWw
2.An example of homologous organs is
(a)our arm and a dog™s fore-leg.
(b)our teeth and an elephant™s tusks.
(c)potato and runners of grass.
(d)all of the above.
3.In evolutionary terms, we have more in common with
(a)a Chinese school-boy.
(b)a chimpanzee.
(c)a spider.
(d)a bacterium.
4.A study found that children with light-coloured eyes are likely to have parents
with light-coloured eyes. On this basis, can we say anything about whether the

light eye colour trait is dominant or recessive? Why or why not?5.How are the areas of study Œ evolution and classification Œ interlinked?

6.Explain the terms analogous and homologous organs with examples.

7.Outline a project which aims to find the dominant coat colour in dogs.

8.Explain the importance of fossils in deciding evolutionary relationships.

9.What evidence do we have for the origin of life from inanimate matter?
10.Explain how sexual reproduction gives rise to more viable variations than asexual
reproduction. How does this affect the evolution of those organisms that reproduce

sexually?11.How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents ensured in the
progeny?12.Only variations that confer an advantage to an individual organism will survive in
a population. Do you agree with this statement? Why or why not?EXERCISES
