Science266Management ofNatural Resources16CHAPTERWe learnt in Class IX,  about some natural resources like soil, air
and water and how various components are cycled over and overagain in nature. In the previous chapter we also learnt about the pollution
of these resources because of some of our activities. In this chapter, we

shall look at some of our resources and how we are using them. May be
we should also think about how we ought to be using our resources so
as to sustain the resources and conserve our environment. We shall be

looking at our natural resources like forests, wild-life, water, coal and

petroleum and see what are the issues at stake in deciding how these

resources are to be managed for sustainable development.We often hear or read about environmental problems. These are often
global-level problems and we feel helpless to make any changes. There

are international laws and regulations, and then there are our own
national laws and acts for environmental protection. There are also

national and international organisations working towards protecting our
environment.Activity 16.1Activity 16.1Activity 16.1Activity 16.1Activity 16.1Find out about the international norms to regulate the emissionof carbon dioxide.Have a discussion in class about how we can contribute towards
meeting those norms.Activity 16.2Activity 16.2Activity 16.2Activity 16.2Activity 16.2There are a number of organisations that seek to spread awareness
about our environment and promote activities and attitudes that
lead to the conservation of our environment and natural resources.
Find out about the organisation(s) active in your neighbourhood/
village/town/city.Find out how you can contribute towards the same cause.
Awareness about the problems caused by unthinkingly exploitingour resources has been a fairly recent phenomenon in our society. And
once this awareness rises, some action is usually taken. You must have

heard about the Ganga Action Plan. This multi-crore project came about
in 1985 because the quality of the water in the Ganga was very 
poor
Management of Natural Resources267(see Fig. 16.1). 
Coliform is a group of bacteria, found in human intestines,whose presence in water indicates contamination by disease-causing

microorganisms.MPN: most probable numbermL: millilitre
u/s: upstreamd/s: downstream
Figure 16.1 Total coliform count levels in the Ganga (1993-1994)
Source: Anon 1996, Water Quality Œ Status and Statistics (1993 & 1994),
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi, p.11.Pollution of the GangaAs you can see, there are some measurable factors which are used
to quantify pollution or the quality of the water that we use for various
activities. Some of the pollutants are harmful even when present in very
small quantities and we require sophisticated equipment to measure
them. But as we learnt in Chapter 2, the pH of water is something that
can easily be checked using universal indicator.
The Ganga runs its course of over 2500 km from Gangotri in the Himalayas to Ganga
Sagar in the Bay of Bengal. It is being turned into a drain by more than a hundredtowns and cities in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal that pour their garbage
and excreta into it. Largely untreated sewage is dumped into the Ganges every

day. In addition, think of the pollution caused by other human activities likebathing, washing of clothes and immersion of ashes or unburnt corpses. And then,industries contribute chemical effluents to the Ganga™s pollution load and the
toxicity kills fish in large sections of the river.
Do You Know?

Science268But we need not feel powerless or overwhelmed by the scale of theproblems because there are many things we can do to make a difference.
You must have come across the three R™s to save the environment: Reduce,

Recycle and Reuse. What do they refer to?Reduce:This means that you use less. You save electricity by switching
off unnecessary lights and fans. You save water by repairing

leaky taps. You do not waste food. Can you think of other
things that you can reduce the usage of ?Recycle:This means that you collect plastic, paper, glass and metal
items and recycle these materials to make required thingsinstead of synthesising or extracting fresh plastic, paper, glass
or metal. In order to recycle, we first need to segregate our
wastes so that the material that can be recycled is not dumped
along with other wastes. Does your village/town/city have amechanism in place for recycling these materials?Reuse:This is actually even better than recycling because the process
of recycling uses some energy. In the ‚reuse™ strategy, yousimply use things again and again. Instead of throwing away

used envelopes, you can reverse it and use it again. The plasticbottles in which you buy various food-items like jam or pickle
can be used for storing things in the kitchen. What other items

can we reuse?But even while making everyday choices, we can make environment-
friendly decisions. For doing this, we need to know more about how our

choices affect the environment, these effects may be immediate or long-
term or long-ranging. The concept of sustainable developmentencourages forms of growth that meet current basic human needs, while

preserving the resources for the needs of future generations. Economicdevelopment is linked to environmental conservation. Thus sustainable
development implies a change in all aspects of life. It depends upon the

willingness of the people to change their perceptions of the socio-economicand environmental conditions around them, and the readiness of eachindividual to alter their present use of natural resources.
Activity 16.3Activity 16.3Activity 16.3Activity 16.3Activity 16.3Check the pH of the water supplied to your house using universalindicator or litmus paper.
Also check the pH of the water in the local water body (pond, river,
lake, stream).Can you say whether the water is polluted or not on the basis ofyour observations?Activity 16.4Activity 16.4Activity 16.4Activity 16.4Activity 16.4Have you ever visited a town or village after a few years of absence?If so, have you noticed new roads and houses that have come upsince you were there last? Where do you think the materials formaking these roads and buildings have come from?Try and make a list of the materials and their probable sources.
Discuss the list you have prepared with your classmates. Can

you think of ways in which the use of these materials be reduced?
Management of Natural Resources26916.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?16.1 WHY DO WE NEED TO MANAGE OUR RESOURCES?Not just roads and buildings, but all the things we use or consumeŒ
food, clothes, books, toys, furniture, tools and vehicles Œ are obtainedfrom resources on this earth. The only thing we get from outside is energywhich we receive from the Sun. Even this energy is processed by living
organisms and various physical and chemical processes on the earthbefore we make use of it.Why do we need to use our resources carefully? Because these arenot unlimited and with the human population increasing at a
tremendous rate due to improvement in health-care, the demand for allresources is increasing at an exponential rate. The management of
natural resources requires a long-term perspective so that these willlast for the generations to come and will not merely be exploited to thehilt for short term gains. This management should also ensure equitable
distribution of resources so that all, and not just a handful of rich andpowerful people, benefit from the development of these resources.Another factor to be considered while we exploit these naturalresources is the damage we cause to the environment while theseresources are either extracted or used. For example, mining causespollution because of the large amount of slag which is discarded for

every tonne of metal extracted. Hence, sustainable natural resource
management demands that we plan for the safe disposal of these
wastes too.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.What changes can you make in your habits to become more environment-
friendly?2.What would be the advantages of exploiting resources with short-term
aims?3.How would these advantages differ from the advantages of using a long-
term perspective in managing our resources?4.Why do you think there should be equitable distribution of resources?
What forces would be working against an equitable distribution of our
resources?16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFE16.2 FORESTS AND WILD LIFEForests are ‚biodiversity hot spots™. One measure of the biodiversity of
an area is the number of species found there. However, the range of

different life forms (bacteria, fungi, ferns, flowering plants, nematodes,
insects, birds, reptiles and so on) is also important. One of the main

aims of conservation is to try and preserve the biodiversity we have
inherited. Experiments and field studies suggest that a loss of diversity
may lead to a loss of ecological stability.

Science270Activity 16.5Activity 16.5Activity 16.5Activity 16.5Activity 16.5Make a list of forest produce that you use.
What do you think a person living near a forest would use?What do you think a person living in a forest would use?Discuss with your classmates how these needs differ or do notdiffer and the reasons for the same.We all use various forest produce. But our dependency on forest
resources varies. Some of us have access to alternatives, some do not.

When we consider the conservation of forests, we need to look at the

stakeholders who are Œ(i)the people who live in or around forests are dependent on forest
produce for various aspects of their life (see Fig. 16.2).
(ii)the Forest Department of the Government which owns the land
and controls the resources from forests.(iii)
the industrialists Œ from those who use ‚tendu™ leaves to makebidis to the ones with paper mills Œ who use various forest produce,but are not dependent on the forests in any one area.
(iv)the wild life and nature enthusiasts who want to conserve nature
in its pristine form.Let us take a look at what each of these groups
needs/gets out of the forests. The local people
need large quantities of firewood, small timber
and thatch. Bamboo is used to make slats for huts,
and baskets for collecting and storing food
materials. Implements for agriculture, fishing and
hunting are largely made of wood, also forests
are sites for fishing and hunting. In addition to
people gathering fruits, nuts and medicines from
the forests, their cattle also graze in forest areas
or feed on other fodder which is collected from

forests.Do you think such use of forest resources would lead to theexhaustion of these resources? Do not forget that before the British came

and took over most of our forest areas, people had been living in these
forests for centuries. They had developed practices to ensure that the

resources were used in a sustainable manner. After the British took

control of the forests (which they exploited ruthlessly for their own
purposes), these people were forced to depend on much smaller areas
and forest resources started becoming over-exploited to some extent.

The Forest Department in independent India took over from the British
but local knowledge and local needs continued to be ignored in the
management practices. Thus vast tracts of forests have been converted
to monocultures of pine, teak or eucalyptus. In order to plant these
trees, huge areas are first cleared of all vegetation. This destroys a large

amount of biodiversity in the area. Not only this, the varied needs of the16.2.1 StakeholdersFigure 16.2
A view of a forest life
Management of Natural Resources271local people Œ leaves for fodder, herbs for medicines, fruits and nuts for
food Œ can no longer be met from such forests. Such plantations are
useful for the industries to access specific products and are an important
source of revenue for the Forest Department.
Do you know how many industries are based on forest produce? A
short count reveals timber, paper, lac and sports equipment.
Activity 16.6Activity 16.6Activity 16.6Activity 16.6Activity 16.6Find out about any two forest produce that are the basis for anindustry.Discuss whether this industry is sustainable in the long run. Or
do we need to control our consumption of these products?Industries would consider the forest as merely a source of raw
material for its factories. And huge interest-groups lobby the government
for access to these raw materials at artificially low rates. Since theseindustries have a greater reach than the local people, they are notinterested in the sustainability of the forest in one particular area. For
example, after cutting down all the teak trees in one area, they will get
their teak from a forest farther away. They do not have any stake inensuring that one particular area should yield on optimal amount of

some produce for all generations to come. What do you think will stopthe local people in behaving in a similar manner?Lastly, we come to the nature and wildlife enthusiasts who are in noway dependent on the forests, but who may have considerable say intheir management. The conservationists were initially taken up with largeanimals like lions, tigers, elephants and rhinoceros. They now recognise
the need to preserve biodiversity as a whole. But shouldn™t we recognisepeople as forming part of the forest system? There have been enoughinstances of local people working traditionally for conservation of forests.

For example, the case of the Bishnoi community in Rajasthan, for whomconservation of forest and wildlife has been a religious tenet. The
Government of India has recently instituted an ‚Amrita Devi Bishnoi
National Award for Wildlife Conservation™ in the memory of Amrita Devi
Bishnoi, who in 1731 sacrificed her life along with 363 others for the
protection of ‚khejri™ trees in Khejrali village near Jodhpur in Rajasthan.Studies have shown that the prejudice against the traditional use offorest areas has no basis. Here is an example Œ the great Himalayan
National Park contains, within its reserved area, alpine meadows which
were grazed by sheep in summer. Nomadic shepherds drove their flock
up from the valleys every summer. When this national park was formed,
this practice was put to an end. Now it is seen that without the regular
grazing by sheep the grass first grows very tall, and then falls overpreventing fresh growth.Management of protected areas, by keeping the local people out, by
using force cannot possibly be successful in the long run. In any case, the

damage caused to forests cannot be attributed to only the local people Œone cannot turn a blind eye to the deforestation caused by industrial

Science272needs or development projects like building roads or dams. The damagecaused in these reserves by tourists or the arrangements made for theirconvenience is also to be considered.We need to accept that human intervention has been very much a
part of the forest landscape. What has to be managed in the nature andextent of this intervention. Forest resources ought to be used in a mannerthat is both environmentally and developmentally sound Œ in other words,

while the environment is preserved, the benefits of the controlled
exploitation go to the local people, a process in which decentralisedeconomic growth and ecological conservation go hand in hand. The kind
of economic and social development we want will ultimately determinewhether the environment will be conserved or further destroyed. The
environment must not be regarded as a pristine collection of plants and
animals. It is a vast and complex entity that offers a range of naturalresources for our use. We need to use these resources with due caution
for our economic and social growth, and to meet our material aspirations.16.2.2 Sustainable ManagementWe need to consider if the goals of all the above stakeholders with regard

to the management of the forests are the same. Forest resources are
often made available for industrial use at rates far below the marketvalue while these are denied to the local people. The Chipko Andolan(‚Hug the Trees Movement™) was the result of a grassroot level effort to

end the alienation of people from their forests. The movement originated
from an incident in a remote village called Reni in Garhwal, high-up inthe Himalayas during the early 1970s. There was a dispute between thelocal villagers and a logging contractor who had been allowed to felltrees in a forest close to the village. On a particular day, the contractor™s
workers appeared in the forest to cut the trees while the men folk were
absent. Undeterred, the women of the village reached the forest quicklyand clasped the tree trunks thus preventing the workers from felling the
trees. Thus thwarted, the contractor had to withdraw.Inherent in such a competition to control a natural resource is theconservation of a replenishable resource. Specifically the method of use
was being called into question. The contractor would have felled thetrees, destroying them forever. The communities traditionally lop the
branches and pluck the leaves, allowing the resource to replenish over
time. The Chipko movement quickly spread across communities and
media, and forced the government, to whom the forest belongs, to rethink
their priorities in the use of forest produce. Experience has taught people
that the destruction of forests affected not just the availability of forestproducts, but also the quality of soil and the sources of water.
Participation of the local people can indeed lead to the efficient

management of forests.
An Example of People™s Participation in the Management of ForestsIn 1972, the West Bengal Forest Department recognised its failures in

reviving the degraded Sal forests in the southwestern districts of the
state. Traditional methods of surveillance and policing had led to a

Management of Natural Resources273‚complete alienation of the people from the administration™, resulting in
frequent clashes between forest officials and villagers. Forest and landrelated conflicts in the region were also a major factor in fuelling themilitant peasant movements led by the Naxalites.Accordingly, the Department changed its strategy, making a
beginning in the Arabari forest range of Midnapore district. Here, at the
instance of a far-seeing forest officer, A.K. Banerjee, villagers were involved

in the protection of 1,272 hectares of badly degraded sal forest. In return
for help in protection, villagers were given employment in both silviculture
and harvesting operations, 25 per cent of the final harvest, and allowed
fuelwood and fodder collection on payment of a nominal fee. With the
active and willing participation of the local community, the sal forests of

Arabari underwent a remarkable recovery Œ by 1983, a previously
worthless forest was valued Rs 12.5 crores.Activity 16.7Activity 16.7Activity 16.7Activity 16.7Activity 16.7Debate the damage caused to forests by the following Œ(a)Building rest houses for tourists in national parks.

(b)Grazing domestic animals in national parks.

(c)Tourists throwing plastic bottles/covers and other litter in
national parks.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Why should we conserve forests and wildlife?
2.Suggest some approaches towards the conservation of forests.
16.3 WATER FOR ALL
Activity 16.8Activity 16.8Activity 16.8Activity 16.8Activity 16.8Villages suffering from chronic water shortage surround a water
theme park in Maharashtra. Debate whether this is the optimum
use of the available water.
Water is a basic necessity for all terrestrial forms of life. We studied in
Class IX about the importance of water as a resource, the water cycle
and how human intervention pollutes water bodies. However, human

intervention also changes the availability of water in various regions.
Activity 16.9Activity 16.9Activity 16.9Activity 16.9Activity 16.9Study the rainfall patterns in India from an atlas.
Identify the regions where water is abundant and the regions ofwater scarcity.
Science274After the above activity, would you be very surprised to learn thatregions of water scarcity are closely correlated to the regions of acute
poverty?A study of rainfall patterns does not reveal the whole truth behindthe water availability in various regions in India. Rains in India are largely
due to the monsoons. This means that most of the rain falls in a few

months of the year.  Despite nature™s monsoon bounty, failure to sustain

water availability underground has resulted largely from the loss of

vegetation cover, diversion for high water demanding crops, and pollution

from industrial effluents and urban wastes. Irrigation methods like dams,
tanks and canals have been used in various parts of India since ancient
times. These were generally local interventions managed by local people
and assured that the basic minimum requirements for both agriculture
and daily needs were met throughout the year. The use of this stored

water was strictly regulated and the optimum cropping patterns based
on the water availability were arrived at on the basis of decades/centuries
of experience, the maintenance of these irrigation systems was also a

local affair,
The arrival of the British changed these systems as it changed many
other things. The conception of large scale projects Œ large dams and
canals traversing large distances were first conceived and implemented
by the British and carried on with no less gusto by our newly formed

independent government. These mega-projects led to the neglect of the
local irrigation methods, and the government also increasingly took over
the administration of these systems leading to the loss of control over

the local water sources by the local people.Kulhs in Himachal Pradesh
Parts of Himachal Pradesh had evolved a local system of canal irrigation called 
kulhsover four hundred years ago. The water flowing in the streams was diverted into

man-made channels which took this water to numerous villages down the hillside.
The management of the water flowing in these kulhs was by common agreement among
all the villages. Interestingly, during the planting season, water was first used by the
village farthest away from the source of the kulh, then by villages progressively higherup. These kulhs were managed by two or three people who were paid by the villagers.
In addition to irrigation, water from these 
kulhs also percolated into the soil and fed
springs at various points. After the 
kulhs were taken over by the Irrigation Department,
most of them became defunct and there is no amicable sharing of water as before.16.3.1 DamsWhy do we seek to build dams? Large dams can ensure the storage of
adequate water not just for irrigation, but also for generating electricity,

as discussed in the previous chapter. Canal systems leading from these

dams can transfer large amounts of water great distances. For example,

the Indira Gandhi Canal has brought greenery to considerable areas of
Rajasthan. However, mismanagement of the water has largely led to the

benefits being cornered by a few people. There is no equitable distributionMore to Know!

Management of Natural Resources275of water, thus people close to the source grow water intensive crops like
sugarcane and rice while people farther downstream do not get any water.

The woes of these people who have been promised benefits which never
arrived are added to the discontentment among the people who have
been displaced by the building of the dam and its canal network.
In the previous chapter, we mentioned the reasons for opposition to
the construction of large dams, such as the Tehri Dam on the river Ganga.

You must have read about the protests by the 
Narmada Bachao Andolan
(‚Save the Narmada Movement™) about raising the height of the Sardar
Sarovar Dam on the river Narmada. Criticisms about large dams address
three problems in particular Œ(i)Social problems because they displace large number of peasants
and tribals without adequate compensation or rehabilitation,(ii)Economic problems because they swallow up huge amounts ofpublic money without the generation of proportionate benefits,(iii)Environmental problems because they contribute enormouslyto deforestation and the loss of biological diversity.The people who have been displaced by various development projectsare largely poor tribals who do not get any benefits from these projects

and are alienated from their lands and forests without adequate

compensation. The oustees of the Tawa Dam built in the 1970s are still
fighting for the benefits they were promised.16.3.2 Water Harvesting
Watershed management emphasises scientific soil and water

conservation in order to increase the biomass production. The aim is to
develop primary resources of land and water, to produce secondary

resources of plants and animals for use in a manner which will not cause
ecological imbalance. Watershed management not only increases the

production and income of the watershed community, but also mitigates

droughts and floods and increases the life of the downstream dam and
reservoirs. Various organisations have been working on rejuvenating

ancient systems of water harvesting as an alternative to the ‚mega-projects™
like dams. These communities have used hundreds of indigenous water
saving methods to capture every trickle of water that had fallen on their

land; dug small pits and lakes, put in place simple watershed systems,
built small earthen dams, constructed dykes, sand and limestone

reservoirs, set up rooftop water-collecting units. This has recharged

groundwater levels and even brought rivers back to life.Water harvesting is an age-old concept in India. 
Khadins, tanksand nadis in Rajasthan, 
bandharas and 
tals in Maharashtra, 
bundhisin Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, ahars and 
pynes in Bihar,
kulhs in Himachal Pradesh, ponds in the Kandi belt of Jammu region,
and eris (tanks) in Tamil Nadu, 
surangams in Kerala, and 
kattas in
Karnataka are some of the ancient water harvesting, including water
conveyance, structures still in use today (see Fig. 16.3 for an

example).Water harvesting techniques are highly locale specific and

the benefits are also localised. Giving people control over their local

water resources ensures that mismanagement and over-exploitation

of these resources is reduced/removed.
Science276In largely level terrain, the water harvesting structures are mainlycrescent shaped earthen embankments or low, straight concrete-and-

rubble ﬁcheck damsﬂ built across seasonally flooded gullies. Monsoon
rains fill ponds behind the structures. Only the largest structures hold
water year round; most dry up six months or less after the monsoons.
Their main purpose, however, is not to hold surface water but to recharge

the ground water beneath. The advantages of water stored in the ground
are many. It does not evaporate, but spreads out to recharge wells and

provides moisture for vegetation over a wide area. In addition, it does
not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes like stagnant water collected
in ponds or artificial lakes. The ground-water is also relatively protected
from contamination by human and animal waste.Figure 16.3 
Traditional water harvesting system Š an ideal setting of the khadin system
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Find out about the traditional systems of water harvesting/management
in your region.2.Compare the above system with the probable systems in hilly/
mountainous areas or plains or plateau regions.3.Find out the source of water in your region/locality. Is water from this
source available to all people living in that area?
16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUM16.4 COAL AND PETROLEUMWe have seen some of the issues involved in the conservation and
sustainable use of resources like forests, wild-life and water. These can

meet our needs perpetually if we were to use them in a sustainable

manner. Now we come to yet another important resource Œ fossil fuels,

that is, coal and petroleum, which are important sources of energy for
us. Since the industrial revolution, we have been using increasing

amounts of energy to meet our basic needs and for the manufacture of a
