Science160Light Œ Reflection andRefraction10CHAPTERWe see a variety of objects in the world around us. However, we are
unable to see anything in a dark room. On lighting up the room,things become visible. What makes things visible? During the day, the
sunlight helps us to see objects. An object reflects light that falls on it.
This reflected light, when received by our eyes, enables us to see things.
We are able to see through a transparent medium as light is transmitted

through it. There are a number of common wonderful phenomena
associated with light such as image formation by mirrors, the twinkling
of stars, the beautiful colours of a rainbow, bending of light by a medium
and so on.  A study of the properties of light helps us to explore them.
By observing the common optical phenomena around us, we mayconclude that light seems to travel in straight lines. The fact that a small
source of light casts a 
sharp shadow of an opaque object points to this
straight-line path of light, usually indicated as a ray of light.More to Know!
If an opaque object on the path of light becomes 
very small, light has a tendency tobend around it and not walk in a straight line Œ an effect known as the diffraction of
light. Then the straight-line treatment of optics using rays fails. To explain phenomena

such as diffraction, light is thought of as a wave, the details of which you will study

in higher classes. Again, at the beginning of the 20th century, it became known that
the wave theory of light often becomes inadequate for treatment of the interaction of
light with matter, and light often behaves somewhat like a 
stream of
 particles. Thisconfusion about the true nature of light continued for some years till a modern

quantum theory of light emerged in which light is neither a ‚wave™ nor a ‚particle™ Œ
the new theory reconciles the particle properties of light with the wave nature.In this Chapter, we shall study the phenomena of reflection and
refraction of light using the straight-line propagation of light. These basic
concepts will help us in the study of some of the optical phenomena in
nature. We shall try to understand in this Chapter the reflection of light

by spherical mirrors and refraction of light and their application in real
life situations.10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHT10.1 REFLECTION OF LIGHTA highly polished surface, such as a mirror, reflects most of the light
falling on it. You are already familiar with the laws of reflection of light.

Light Œ Reflection and Refraction161Let us recall these laws Œ(i)The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, and
(ii)The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidenceand the reflected ray, all lie in the same plane.These laws of reflection are applicable to all types of reflecting surfacesincluding spherical surfaces. You are familiar with the formation of image

by a plane mirror. What are the properties of the image? Image formed

by a plane mirror is always virtual and erect.  The size of the image is

equal to that of the object.  The image formed is as far behind the mirror

as the object is in front of it.  Further, the image is laterally inverted.

How would the images be when the reflecting surfaces are curved? Let
us explore.Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Take a large shining spoon. Try to view your face in its curvedsurface.Do you get the image?  Is it smaller or larger?
Move the spoon slowly away from your face. Observe the image.
How does it change?Reverse the spoon and repeat the Activity.  How does the image

look like now?Compare the characteristics of the image on the two surfaces.The curved surface of a shining spoon could be considered as a curved
mirror.  The most commonly used type of curved mirror is the spherical

mirror.  The reflecting surface of such mirrors can be considered to form

a part of the surface of a sphere.  Such mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces

are spherical, are called spherical mirrors.  We shall now study about

spherical mirrors in some detail.
10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERIC10.2 SPHERICAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSThe reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards oroutwards.  A spherical mirror, whose reflecting surface is curved inwards,

that is, faces towards the centre of the sphere, is called a concave mirror.

A spherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called

a convex mirror. The schematic representation of these mirrors is shown

in Fig. 10.1. You may note in these diagrams that the back

of the mirror is shaded.
You may now understand that the surface of the spoon
curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror
and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be
approximated to a convex mirror.
Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need torecognise and understand the meaning of a few terms. These
terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical
mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is a point called the pole.  It lies on the surface of the

mirror.  The pole is usually represented by the letter P.
Figure 10.1
Schematic representation of spherical
mirrors; the shaded side is non-reflecting.(a) Concave mirror(b) Convex mirror

Science162The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part of a sphere.This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of
the spherical mirror. It is represented by the letter C. Please note that the

centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror. It lies outside its reflecting

surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it.
However, it lies behind the mirror in case of a convex mirror. You may

note this in Fig.10.2 (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the
reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius
of curvature of the mirror. It is represented by the letter 
R. You may note
that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight
line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of a spherical

mirror. This line is called the principal axis. Remember that principal

axis is normal to the mirror at its pole. Let us understand an important
term related to mirrors, through an Activity.Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2CAUTION:
 Do not look at the Sun directly or even into a mirror
reflecting sunlight. It may damage your eyes.Hold a concave mirror in your hand and direct its reflecting surface
towards the Sun.Direct the light reflected by the mirror on to a sheet of paper held
close to the mirror.
Move the sheet of paper back and forth gradually until you find
on the paper sheet a bright, sharp spot of light.Hold the mirror and the paper in the same position for a fewminutes. What do you observe? Why?The paper at first begins to burn producing smoke. Eventually itmay even catch fire. Why does it burn? The light from the Sun is converged

at a point, as a sharp, bright spot by the mirror. In fact, this spot of light
is the image of the Sun on the sheet of paper. This point is

the focus of the concave mirror. The heat produced due to

the concentration of sunlight ignites the paper. The distance

of this image from the position of the mirror gives the
approximate value of focal length of the mirror.
Let us try to understand this observation with the helpof a ray diagram.Observe Fig.10.2 (a) closely. A number of rays parallelto the principal axis are falling on a concave mirror. Observe

the reflected rays. They are all meeting/intersecting at a

point on the principal axis of the mirror.  This point is called

the principal focus of the concave mirror. Similarly, observe

Fig. 10.2 (b). How are the rays parallel to the principal axis,

reflected by a convex mirror? The reflected rays appear to
come from a point on the principal axis. This point is called
the principal focus of the convex mirror. The principal focus

is represented by the letter F. The distance between the

pole and the principal focus of a spherical mirror is called
the focal length. It is represented by the letter f.Figure 10.2(a) Concave mirror
(b) Convex mirror(b)(a)
Light Œ Reflection and Refraction163The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is by and large spherical.
The surface, then, has a circular outline. The diameter of the reflecting
surface of spherical mirror is called its aperture. In Fig.10.2, distance
MN represents the aperture. We shall consider in our discussion only

such spherical mirrors whose aperture is much smaller than its radius
of curvature.Is there a relationship between the radius of curvature R, and focal
length f, of a spherical mirror? For spherical mirrors of small apertures,
the radius of curvature is found to be equal to twice the focal length. We

put this as R = 2f .  This implies that the principal focus of a spherical
mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature.
10.2.1  Image Formation by Spherical Mirrors
You have studied about the image formation by plane mirrors. You also

know the nature, position and relative size of the images formed by them.
How about the images formed by spherical mirrors? How can we locate

the image formed by a concave mirror for different positions of the object?
Are the images real or virtual? Are they enlarged, diminished or have
the same size? We shall explore this with an Activity.
Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3Activity 10.3You have already learnt a way of determining the focal length of a
concave mirror. In Activity 10.2, you have seen that the sharp bright

spot of light you got on the paper is, in fact, the image of the Sun. Itwas a tiny, real, inverted image. You got the approximate focal length
of the concave mirror by measuring the distance of the image from

the mirror.
Take a concave mirror.  Find out its approximate focal length in

the way described above. Note down the value of focal length. (You

can also find it out by obtaining image of a distant object on a
sheet of paper.)
Mark a line on a Table with a chalk.  Place the concave mirror on

a stand.  Place the stand over the line such that its pole lies over

the line.Draw with a chalk two more lines parallel to the previous line

such that the distance between any two successive lines is equal

to the focal length of the mirror. These lines will now correspond

to the positions of the points P, F and C, respectively. 
Remember ŒFor a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies
mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature 
C.Keep a bright object, say a burning candle, at a position far beyondC.  Place a paper screen and move it in front of the mirror till you

obtain a sharp bright image of the candle flame on it.Observe the image carefully.  Note down its nature, position and

relative size with respect to the object size.Repeat the activity by placing the candle
 Œ (a) just beyond C,
(b) at C, (c) between F and C, (d) at F, and (e) between P and F.
In one of the cases, you may not get the image on the screen.
Identify the position of the object in such a case. Then, look for its

virtual image in the mirror itself.Note down and tabulate your observations.
Science164You will see in the above Activity that the nature, position and size of
the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the
object in relation to points P, F and C. The image formed is real for some

positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other

position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size,

depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations

is given for your reference in Table 10.1.
Table 10.1 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object
Position of thePosition of theSize of theNature of the
objectimageimageimage
At infinityAt the 
focus F
Highly diminished,Real and inverted
point-sizedBeyond CBetween F and C
DiminishedReal and invertedAt CAt CSame sizeReal and inverted
Between C and FBeyond C
EnlargedReal and invertedAt FAt infinityH
ighly enlargedReal and invertedBetween P and F
Behind the mirrorEnlargedV
irtual and erect
10.2.2Representation of Images Formed by Spherical
Mirrors Using Ray DiagramsWe can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed
in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object

acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a

point could be considered.  However, it is more convenient to consider

only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the
mirror.
The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of imageof the point object.  Any two of the following rays can be considered for

locating the image.(i)A ray parallel to theprincipal axis
, afterreflection, will pass through
the principal focus in case ofa concave mirror or appearto diverge from the principal
focus in case of a convex
mirror. This is illustrated in
Fig.10.3 (a) and (b).(a)(b)
Figure 10.3
Light Œ Reflection and Refraction165(ii)A ray passing through theprincipal focus of a concave
mirror or a ray which is
directed towards the
principal focus of a convexmirror, after reflection, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This isillustrated in Fig.10.4 (a)and (b).(iii)A ray passing through thecentre of curvature of a
concave mirror or directedin the direction of the centre

of curvature of a convex
mirror, after reflection, is
reflected back along the
same path.  This is
illustrated in Fig.10.5 (a)and (b). The light rays come
back along the same pathbecause the incident raysfall on the mirror along the
normal to the reflectingsurface.(iv)A ray incident obliquely tothe principal axis
, towardsa point P (pole of the mirror),on the concave mirror
[Fig. 10.6 (a)] or a convex
mirror [Fig. 10.6 (b)], isreflected obliquely. The
incident and reflected raysfollow the laws of reflection
at the point of incidence
(point P), making equalangles with the principal axis.(a)(b)
Figure 10.4Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed.At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.(a)Image formation by Concave MirrorFigure 10.7 illustrates the ray diagrams for the formation of image
by a concave mirror for various positions of the object.
(b)(a)Figure 10.5(a)(b)
Figure 10.6
Science166Figure 10.7 Ray diagrams for the image formation by a concave mirror
Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Activity 10.4Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown inTable 10.1.You may take any two of the rays mentioned in the previous section

for locating the image.Compare your diagram with those given in Fig. 10.7.Describe the nature, position and relative size of the image formed
in each case.Tabulate the results in a convenient format.Uses of concave mirrorsConcave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights andvehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are
often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The

dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients.
Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce
heat in solar furnaces.(b)Image formation by a Convex MirrorWe studied the image formation by a concave mirror. Now we shall

study the formation of image by a convex mirror.

Light Œ Reflection and Refraction167We consider two positions of the object for studying the image formed
by a convex mirror.  First is when the object is at infinity and the second

position is when the object is at a finite distance from the mirror. The ray

diagrams for the formation of image by a convex mirror for these two
positions of the object are shown in Fig.10.8 (a) and (b), respectively.
The results are summarised in Table 10.2.
Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Activity 10.5Take a convex mirror.  Hold it in one hand.
Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand.Observe the image of the pencil in the mirror. Is the image erect or
inverted?  Is it diminished or enlarged?
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image
become smaller or larger?Repeat this Activity carefully.  State whether the image will move

closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is moved
away from the mirror?Figure 10.8 Formation of image by a convex mirrorYou have so far studied the image formation by a plane mirror, a
concave mirror and a convex mirror.  Which of these mirrors will give the

full image of a large object? Let us explore through an Activity.Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Activity 10.6Observe the image of a distant object, say a distant tree, in aplane mirror.
Could you see a full-length image?Table 10.2 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex mirror
Position of thePosition of theSize of theNature of the
objectimageimageimage
At infinityAt the 
focus F,
Highly diminished,Virtual and erect
behind the mirrorpoint-sizedBetween infinityBetween P and F,
DiminishedV
irtual and erect
and the pole P ofbehind the mirror
the mirror
Science168Try with plane mirrors of different sizes. Did you see the entireobject in the image?Repeat this Activity with a concave mirror.  Did the mirror show

full length image of the object?Now try using a convex mirror. Did you succeed? Explain your

observations with reason.You can see a full-length image of a tall building/tree in a small
convex mirror. One such mirror is fitted in a wall of Agra Fort. If you visit

the Agra Fort, try to observe the full-length image of a distant, tall
building/tomb in the wall mirror. To view the tomb distinctly, you should

stand suitably at the terrace adjoining the wall.Uses of convex mirrors
Convex mirrors are commonly used as rear-view (wing) mirrors in
vehicles. These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle, enabling the
driver to see traffic behind him/her to facilitate safe driving. Convex
mirrors are preferred because they always give an erect, though
diminished, image. Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved

outwards. Thus, convex mirrors enable the driver to view much larger
area than would be possible with a plane mirror.
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Define the principal focus of a concave mirror.
2.The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is 20 cm.  What is its focal
length?3.Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of an object.

4.Why do we prefer a convex mirror as a rear-view mirror in vehicles?
10.2.3 Sign Convention for Reflection by Spherical MirrorsWhile dealing with the reflection of light by spherical mirrors, we shall
follow a set of sign conventions called the New Cartesian SignConvention. In this convention, the pole (P) of the mirror is taken as theorigin.  The principal axis of the mirror is taken as the x-axis (X™X) of the

coordinate system. The conventions are as follows Œ(i)The object is always placed to the left of the mirror. This implies
that the light from the object falls on the mirror from the left-hand
side.(ii)All distances parallel to the principal axis are measured from thepole of the mirror.
(iii)All 
the distances measured to the right of the origin (along+ x-axis) are taken as positive while those measured to the left of

the origin (along Œ x-axis) are taken as negative.(iv)Dist
ances measured perpendicular to and above the principal axis
(along + y-axis) are taken as positive.(v)Distances measured perpendicular to and below the principal axis
(along Œy-axis) are taken as negative.
Light Œ Reflection and Refraction169The New Cartesian Sign Convention described above is illustrated inFig.10.9 for your reference. These sign conventions are applied to obtain
the mirror formula and solve related numerical problems.10.2.4  Mirror Formula and  Magnification
In a spherical mirror, the distance of the

object from its pole is called the object
distance (u).  The distance of the image from
the pole of the mirror is called the image
distance (v). You already know that the
distance of the principal focus from the pole
is called the focal length (f). There is arelationship between these three quantities
given by the mirror formula 
which isexpressed as111
vuf
+=(10.1)This formula is valid in all situations for allspherical mirrors for all positions of theobject. You must use the New Cartesian Sign
Convention while substituting numerical
values for u, v, f, and R in the mirror formulafor solving problems.MagnificationMagnification produced by a spherical mirror gives the relative extent towhich the image of an object is magnified with respect to the object size.
It is expressed as the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the
object. It is usually represented by the letter m.If h is the height of the object and 
h is the height of the image, then
the magnification m produced by a spherical mirror is given by
m = Height of the image ()
Height of the object ()
hhm = 
hh(10.2)The magnification m is also related to the object distance (
u) andimage distance (v).  It can be expressed as:
Magnification (m)  = 
hhvu™=−(10.3)You may note that the height of the object is taken to be positive as
the object is usually placed above the principal axis.  The height of the

image should be taken as positive for virtual images.  However, it is to be
taken as negative for real images. A negative sign in the value of themagnification indicates that the image is real. A positive sign in the value
of the magnification indicates that the image is virtual.Figure 10.9The New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical mirrors
