The Human Eye andthe Colourful World11CHAPTERYou have studied in the previous chapter about refraction of light bylenses. You also studied the nature, position and relative size ofimages formed by lenses. How can these ideas help us in the study ofthe human eye? The human eye uses light and enables us to see objects
around us. It has a lens in its structure.  What is the function of the lens
in a human eye? How do the lenses used in spectacles correct defects ofvision? Let us consider these questions in this chapter.We have learnt in the previous chapter about light and some of itsproperties. In this chapter, we shall use these ideas to study some of theoptical phenomena in nature. We shall also discuss about rainbowformation, splitting of white light and blue colour of the sky.11.1 THE HUMAN EYEThe human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs.
It enables us to see the wonderful world and the colours around us. Onclosing the eyes, we can identify objects to some extent by their smell,
taste, sound they make or by touch. It is, however, impossible to identifycolours while closing the eyes. Thus, of all the sense organs, the human
eye is the most significant one as it enables us to see the beautiful,colourful world around us.The human eye is like a camera.  Its lenssystem forms an image on a light-sensitivescreen called the retina. Light enters the eye
through a thin membrane called the cornea.It forms the transparent bulge on the frontsurface of the eyeball as shown in Fig. 11.1.
The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape
with a diameter of about 2.3 cm. Most of the
refraction for the light rays entering the eyeoccurs at the outer surface of the cornea. Thecrystalline lens merely provides the finer
adjustment of focal length required to focus
objects at different distances on the retina. We find a structure called irisbehind the cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls thesize of the pupil.  The pupil regulates and controls the amount of lightFigure 11.1The human eye
Science188entering the eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the objecton the retina. The retina is a delicate membrane having enormousnumber of light-sensitive cells.  The light-sensitive cells get activated
upon illumination and generate electrical signals.  These signals are
sent to the brain via the optic nerves.  The brain interprets these signals,
and finally, processes the information so that we perceive objects asthey are.Do You Know?Damage to or malfunction of any part of the visual system can lead to significant lossof visual functioning. For example, if any of the structures involved in the transmissionof light, like the cornea, pupil, eye lens, aqueous humour and vitreous humour orthose responsible for conversion of light to electrical impulse, like the retina or even
the optic nerve that transmits these impulses to the brain, is damaged, it will resultin visual impairment.You might have experienced that you are not able to see objectsclearly for some time when you enter from bright light to a room with dim light. After
sometime, however, you may be able to see things in the dim-lit room. The pupil ofan eye acts like a variable aperture whose size can be varied with the help of the iris.When the light is very bright, the iris contracts the pupil to allow less light to enterthe eye. However, in dim light the iris expands the pupil to allow more light to enterthe eye. Thus, the pupil opens completely through the relaxation of the iris.11.1.1 Power of AccommodationThe eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. Its curvature
can be modified to some extent by the ciliary muscles. The change in thecurvature of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the
muscles are relaxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal lengthincreases.  This enables us to see distant objects clearly. When you arelooking at objects closer to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. Thisincreases the curvature of the eye lens. The eye lens then becomes thicker.Consequently, the focal length of the eye lens decreases.  This enablesus to see nearby objects clearly.The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length is calledaccommodation.  However, the focal length of the eye lens cannot bedecreased below a certain minimum limit.  Try to read a printed pageby holding it very close to your eyes. You may see the image being blurredor feel strain in the eye. To see an object comfortably and distinctly, youmust hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes.  The minimum distance, atwhich objects can be seen most distinctly without strain, is called theleast distance of distinct vision. It is also called the near point of the eye.For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about
25 cm. The farthest point upto which the eye can see objects clearly iscalled the far point of the eye. It is infinity for a normal eye. You maynote here a normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm
and infinity.Sometimes, the crystalline lens of people at old age becomes milky andcloudy. This condition is called cataract. This causes partial or complete
loss of vision. It is possible to restore vision through a cataract surgery.
The Human Eye and the Colourful World189Why do we have two eyes for vision and not just one?There are several advantages of our having two eyes instead of one. It gives a widerfield of view. A human being has a horizontal field of view of about 150° with one eye
and of about 180° with two eyes. The ability to detect faint objects is, of course,enhanced with two detectors instead of one.Some animals, usually prey animals, have their two eyes positioned on opposite sidesof their heads to give the widest possible field of view. But our two eyes are positionedon the front of our heads, and it thus reduces our field of view in favour of what is
called stereopsis. Shut one eye and the world looks flat Œ two-dimensional. Keep botheyes open and the world takes on the third dimension of depth. Because our eyesare separated by a few centimetres, each eye sees a slightly different image. Our
brain combines the two images into one, using the extra information to tell us howclose or far away things are.11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION11.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTIONSometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defectsof the eye.There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. Theseare (i) myopia or near-sightedness, (ii) Hypermetropia or far-sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia.  These defects can be corrected bythe use of suitable spherical lenses. We discuss below these defectsand their correction.(a)MyopiaMyopia is also known as near-sightedness. A person with myopiacan see nearby objects clearly butcannot see distant objects distinctly.A person with this defect has the farpoint nearer than infinity. Such aperson may see clearly upto adistance of a few metres. In a myopic
eye, the image of a distant object isformed in front of the retina[Fig. 11.2 (b)] and not at the retinaitself.  This defect may arise due to(i) excessive curvature of the eye lens,
or (ii) elongation of the eyeball. Thisdefect can be corrected by using aconcave lens of suitable power.This is illustrated in Fig. 11.2 (c).
A concave lens of suitable power
will bring the image back on tothe retina and thus the defectis corrected.Do You Know?Figure 11.2(a), (b) The myopic eye, and (c) correction for myopia with a
concave lens(a) Far point of a myopic eye(b) Myopic Eye(c) Correction for myopia
OOO™O
Science190(b)  HypermetropiaHypermetropia is also known as far-sightedness. Aperson with hypermetropia can see distant objectsclearly but cannot see nearby objects distinctly. The
near point, for the person, is farther away from the
normal near point (25 cm). Such a person has to keepa reading material much beyond 25 cm from the eyefor comfortable reading. This is because the light rays
from a closeby object are focussed at a point behindthe retina as shown in Fig. 11.3 (b). This defect ariseseither because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is too
long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small. This defectcan be corrected by using a convex lens of appropriatepower. This is illustrated in Fig. 11.3 (c). Eye-glasseswith converging lenses provide the additional focussing
power required for forming the image on the retina.(c)  PresbyopiaThe power of accommodation of the eye usuallydecreases with ageing. For most people, the near pointgradually recedes away. They find it difficult to seenearby objects comfortably and distinctly withoutcorrective eye-glasses.  This defect is called Presbyopia.  It arisesdue to the gradual weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishingflexibility of the eye lens.  Sometimes, a person may suffer from
both myopia and hypermetropia.  Such people often require bi-
focal lenses. A common type of bi-focal lenses consists of bothconcave and convex lenses.  The upper portion consists of a concavelens. It facilitates distant vision. The lower part is a convex lens.  It
facilitates near vision.  These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects withcontact lenses or through surgical interventions.(a) Near point of a Hypermetropic eye
(b) Hypermetropic eye
(c) Correction for Hypermetropic eye
NNN™
NN™Figure 11.3(a), (b) The hypermetropic eye, and (c) correctionfor hypermetropiaQUESTIONS?1.What is meant by power of accommodation of the eye?2.A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2 m distinctly.What should be the type of the corrective lens used to restore propervision?3.What is the far point and near point of the human eye with normalvision?4.A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting in the last
row. What could be the defect the child is suffering from? How can it becorrected?
The Human Eye and the Colourful World191Think it overYou talk of wondrous things you see,You say the sun shines bright;I feel him warm, but how can heOr make it day or night? Œ C. CIBBERDo you know that our eyes can live even after our death? By donating our eyes after wedie, we can light the life of a blind person.
About 35 million people in the developing world are blind and most of them can becured. About 4.5 million people with corneal blindness can be cured through cornealtransplantation of donated eyes. Out of these 4.5 million, 60% are children below theage of 12. So, if we have got the gift of vision, why not pass it on to somebody who doesnot have it? What do we have to keep in mind when eyes have to be donated?nEye donors can belong to any age group or sex. People who use spectacles, or thoseoperated for cataract, can still donate the eyes. People who are diabetic, havehypertension, asthma patients and those without communicable diseases can alsodonate eyes.nEyes must be removed within 4-6 hours after death. Inform the nearest eye bankimmediately.nThe eye bank team will remove the eyes at the home of the deceased or at a hospital.nEye removal takes only 10-15 minutes. It is a simple process and does not lead toany disfigurement.nPersons who were infected with or died because of AIDS, Hepatitis B or C, rabies,acute leukaemia, tetanus, cholera, meningitis or encephalitis cannot donate eyes.An eye bank collects, evaluates and distributes the donated eyes. All eyes donated are
evaluated using strict medical standards. Those donated eyes found unsuitable fortransplantation are used for valuable research and medical education. The identities ofboth the donor and the recipient remain confidential.
One pair of eyes gives vision to TWO CORNEAL BLIND PEOPLE.11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM11.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISMYou have learnt how light gets refracted through a rectangular glassslab. For parallel refracting surfaces, as in a glass slab, the emergent ray
is parallel to the incident ray.  However, it is slightly displaced laterally.How would light get refracted through a transparent prism? Consider a
triangular glass prism. It has two triangular bases and three rectangularlateral surfaces. These surfaces are inclined to each other. The anglebetween its two lateral faces is called the angle of the prism. Let us nowdo an activity to study the refraction of light through a triangular glass
prism.
Science192Activity 11.1Activity 11.1Activity 11.1Activity 11.1Activity 11.1nFix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.nPlace a glass prism on it in such a way that it rests on its triangularbase. Trace the outline of the prism using a pencil.nDraw a straight line PE inclined to one of the refracting surfaces,
say AB, of the prism.nFix two pins, say at points P and Q, on the line PE as shown inFig. 11.4.nLook for the images of the pins, fixed at P and Q, through the
other face AC.nFix two more pins, at points R and S, such that the pins at R andS and the images of the pins at P and Q lie on the same straightline.nRemove the pins and the glass prism.nThe line PE meets the boundary of the prism at point E(see Fig. 11.4). Similarly, join and produce the points R and S.  Let
these lines meet the boundary of the prism at E and F, respectively.Join E and F.nDraw perpendiculars to the refracting surfaces AB and AC of theprism at points E and F, respectively.nMark the angle of incidence (Ði), the angle of refraction (Ðr) andthe angle of emergence (Ðe) as shown in Fig. 11.4.PQN™M™MNASRBCeriDGEFHPE Œ Incident rayÐi Œ Angle of incidenceEF Œ Refracted rayÐr Œ Angle of refractionFS Œ Emergent rayÐe Œ Angle of emergenceÐA Œ Angle of the prismÐD Œ Angle of deviationFigure 11.4 Refraction of light through a triangular glass prismHere PE is the incident ray, EF is the refracted ray and FS is theemergent ray. You may note that a ray of light is entering from air toglass at the first surface AB. The light ray on refraction has bent towards
the normal. At the second surface AC, the light ray has entered fromglass to air. Hence it has bent away from normal. Compare the angle ofincidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the
prism. Is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab?
The peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at anangle to the direction of the incident ray. This angle is called the angle ofdeviation. In this case ÐD is the angle of deviation. Mark the angle ofdeviation in the above activity and measure it.
The Human Eye and the Colourful World193Activity 11.2Activity 11.2Activity 11.2Activity 11.2Activity 11.211.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL11.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GLASS PRISMASS PRISMASS PRISMASS PRISMASS PRISMYou must have seen and appreciated the spectacular colours in a rainbow.How could the white light of the Sun give us various colours of therainbow? Before we take up this question, we shall first go back to therefraction of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a
glass prism show exciting phenomenon.  Let us find it out through anactivity.nTake a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrowslit in its middle.nAllow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.nNow, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall onone of its faces as shown in Fig. 11.5.nTurn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screennWhat do you observe? You will find a beautiful band of colours.Why does this happen?The prism has probably split the incidentwhite light into a band of colours.  Note the
colours that appear at the two ends of the
colour band. What is the sequence of coloursthat you see on the screen? The variouscolours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green,
Yellow, Orange and Red, as shown inFig. 11.5. The acronym VIBGYOR will helpyou to remember the sequence of colours.The band of the coloured components of a
light beam is called its spectrum. You mightnot be able to see all the colours separately.
Yet something makes each colour distinct from the other. The splittingof light into its component colours is called dispersion.You have seen that white light is dispersed into its seven-colourcomponents by a prism. Why do we get these colours? Different colours
of light bend through different angles with respect to the incident ray,
as they pass through a prism. The red light bends the least while theviolet the most. Thus the rays of each colour emerge along differentpaths and thus become distinct. It is the band of distinct colours that
we see in a spectrum.Isaac Newton was the first to use a glassprism to obtain the spectrum of sunlight. Hetried to split the colours of the spectrum of
white light further by using another similarprism. However, he could not get any morecolours. He then placed a second identical
prism in an inverted position with respect tothe first prism, as shown in Fig. 11.6. ThisFigure 11.5 Dispersion of white light by the glass prismFigure 11.6 Recombination of the spectrum of white light
Science194allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through thesecond prism. He found a beam of white light emerging from the
other side of the second prism. This observation gave Newtonthe idea that the sunlight is made up of seven colours.Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of sunlight isoften referred to as white light.A rainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after arain shower (Fig. 11.7). It is caused by dispersion of sunlight by
tiny water droplets, present in the atmosphere. A rainbow isalways formed in a direction opposite to that of the Sun. Thewater droplets act like small prisms. They refract and dispersethe incident sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refractit again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. 11.8). Due to thedispersion of light and internal reflection, different colours reach
the observer™s eye.You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when you look atthe sky through a waterfall or through a water fountain, with the
Sun behind you.11.5  
  
 ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIONYou might have observed the apparent random wavering orflickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air risingabove a fire or a radiator. The air just above the fire becomes hotter thanthe air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense) than the cooler air
above it, and has a refractive index slightly less than that of the coolerair. Since the physical conditions of the refracting medium (air) are notstationary, the apparent position of the object, as seen through the hotair, fluctuates. This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction(refraction of light by the earth™s atmosphere) on a small scale in our
local environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon on amuch larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it.Twinkling of starsThe twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction ofstarlight. The starlight, on entering the earth™s atmosphere,undergoes refraction continuously before it reaches the earth.The atmospheric refraction occurs in a medium of gradually
changing refractive index. Since the atmosphere bendsstarlight towards the normal, the apparent position of thestar is slightly different from its actual position. The starappears slightly higher (above) than its actual position whenviewed near the horizon (Fig. 11.9). Further, this apparentposition of the star is not stationary, but keeps on changingslightly, since the physical conditions of the earth™s
atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in theprevious paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, theyapproximate point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays
of light coming from the star goes on varying slightly, theapparent position of the star fluctuates and the amount ofFigure 11.7Rainbow in the skyFigure 11.8Rainbow formationFigure 11.9
Apparent star position
due to atmospheric
refraction
The Human Eye and the Colourful World195Figure 11.10Atmospheric refraction
effects at sunrise and
sunsetstarlight entering the eye flickers Œ the star sometimes appears brighter,and at some other time, fainter, which is the twinkling effect.Why don™t the planets twinkle? The planets are much closer to theearth, and are thus seen as extended sources. If we consider a planet asa collection of a large number of point-sized sources of light, the total
variation in the amount of light entering our eye from all the individualpoint-sized sources will average out to zero, therebynullifying the twinkling effect.Advance sunrise and delayed sunsetThe Sun is visible to us about 2 minutes before theactual sunrise, and about 2 minutes after the actualsunset because of atmospheric refraction. By actual
sunrise, we mean the actual crossing of the horizon bythe Sun. Fig. 11.10 shows the actual and apparentpositions of the Sun with respect to the horizon. The
time difference between actual sunset and the apparentsunset is about 2 minutes. The apparent flattening ofthe Sun™s disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to the
same phenomenon.11.6  SCATTERING OF LIGHTThe interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several
spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of
water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset
are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previousclass, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles.The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible.
However, its path becomes visible through a colloidal solution where thesize of the particles is relatively larger.11.6.1 Tyndall EffectThe earth™s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles.
These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended particlesof dust and molecules of air. When a beam of light strikes such fineparticles, the path of the beam becomes visible. The light reaches us,after being reflected diffusely by these particles. The phenomenon ofscattering of light by the colloidal particles gives rise to Tyndall effectwhich you have studied in Class IX. This phenomenon is seen when a
fine beam of sunlight enters a smoke-filled room through a small hole.
Thus, scattering of light makes the particles visible. Tyndall effect canalso be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a denseforest.  Here, tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light.The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of thescattering particles. Very fine particles scatter mainly blue light whileparticles of larger size scatter light of longer wavelengths.  If the size
of the scattering particles is large enough, then, the scattered light mayeven appear white.
Science19611.6.2 Why is the colour of the clear Sky Blue?The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have sizesmaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective inscattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longerwavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about 1.8
times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through theatmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorterwavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light entersour eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have beenany scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark.  The sky appears
dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is notprominent at such heights.You might have observed that ‚danger™ signal lights are red in colour.Do you know why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke.  Therefore,it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.11.6.3 Colour of the Sun at Sunrise and SunsetHave you seen the sky and the Sun at sunset or sunrise?  Have you
wondered as to why the Sun and the surrounding sky appear red? Let
us do an activity to understand the blue colour of the sky and the reddishappearance of the Sun at the sunrise or sunset.Activity 11.3Activity 11.3Activity 11.3Activity 11.3Activity 11.3nPlace a strong source (S) of white light at the focus of a converginglens (L1).  This lens provides a parallel beam of light.nAllow the light beam to pass through a transparent glass tank  (T)
containing clear water.nAllow the beam of light to pass through a circular hole (c) made in
a cardboard. Obtain a sharp image of the circular hole on a screen
(MN) using a second converging lens (L2), as shown in Fig. 11.11.nDissolve about 200 g of sodium thiosulphate (hypo) in about 2 L of
clean water taken in the tank. Add about 1 to 2 mL of concentratedsulphuric acid to the water. What do you observe?You will find fine microscopic sulphur particles precipitating in about2 to 3 minutes. As the sulphur particles begin to form, you can observethe blue light from the three sidesof the glass tank. This is due to
scattering of short wavelengths by
minute colloidal sulphur
particles. Observe the colour of
the transmitted light from the
fourth side of the glass tank facing
the circular hole. It is interesting
to observe at first the orange redcolour and then bright crimsonred colour on the screen.Figure 11.11An arrangement for observing scattering of light in colloidal solution
The Human Eye and the Colourful World197This activity demonstrates the scattering oflight that helps you to understand the bluishcolour of the sky and the reddish appearance ofthe Sun at the sunrise or the sunset.Light from the Sun near the horizon passesthrough thicker layers of air and larger distancein the earth™s atmosphere before reaching our eyes
(Fig. 11.12).However, light from the Sun overhead wouldtravel relatively shorter distance. At noon, the Sunappears white as only a little of the blue and violetcolours are scattered. Near the horizon, most of
the blue light and shorter wavelengths arescattered away by the particles. Therefore, the light that reaches oureyes is of longer wavelengths. This gives rise to the reddish appearanceof the Sun.Figure 11.12Reddening of the Sun at sunrise and sunsetWhat you have learntnThe ability of the eye to focus both near and distant objects, by adjusting its focallength, is called the accommodation of the eye.nThe smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is
called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision.  For a young
adult with normal vision, it is about 25 cm.nThe common refractive defects of vision include myopia, hypermetropia and
presbyopia. Myopia (short-sightedness Œ the image of distant objects is focussed
before the retina) is corrected by using a concave lens of suitable power.Hypermetropia (far-sightedness Œ the image of nearby objects is focussed beyondthe retina) is corrected by using a convex lens of suitable power. The eye loses itspower of accommodation at old age.nThe splitting of white light into its component colours is called dispersion.nScattering of light causes the blue colour of sky and the reddening of the Sun atsunrise and sunset.EXERCISES1.The human eye can focus objects at different distances by adjusting the focallength of the eye lens. This is due to (a)presbyopia.(b)accommodation.(c)near-sightedness.(d)far-sightedness.
Science1982.The human eye forms the image of an object at  its (a)cornea.(b)  iris.(c)  pupil.(d)  retina.3.The least distance of distinct vision for a young adult with normal vision is about (a)25 m.(b)  2.5 cm.(c)  25 cm.(d)  2.5 m.4.The change in focal length of an eye lens is caused by the action of the (a)pupil.(b)  retina.(c)ciliary muscles.(d)  iris.5.A person needs a lens of power Œ5.5 dioptres for correcting his distant vision. Forcorrecting his near vision he needs a lens of power +1.5 dioptre. What is the focal
length of the lens required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?6.The far point of a myopic person is 80 cm in front of the eye. What is the nature and
power of the lens required to correct the problem?7.Make a diagram to show how hypermetropia is corrected. The near point of a
hypermetropic eye is 1 m. What is the power of the lens required to correct this
defect? Assume that the near point of the normal eye is 25 cm.8.Why is a normal eye not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than
25 cm?9.What happens to the image distance in the eye when we increase the distance of an
object from the eye?10.Why do stars twinkle?11.Explain why the planets do not twinkle.12.Why does the Sun appear reddish early in the morning?13.Why does the sky appear dark instead of blue to an astronaut?
