Metals and Non-metals3CHAPTERIn Class IX you have learnt about various elements. You have seen
that elements can be classified as metals or non-metals on the basis of
their properties.Think of some uses of metals and non-metals in your daily life.What properties did you think of while categorising elementsas metals or non-metals?
How are these properties related to the uses of these elements?
Let us look at some of these properties in detail.
3.1 PHYSIC3.1 PHYSIC3.1 PHYSIC3.1 PHYSIC3.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIES3.1.1 MetalsThe easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their
physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the followingactivities. For Activities 3.1 to 3.6, collect the samples of following
metals Œ iron, copper, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead, zinc and
any other metal that is easily available.Activity 3.1Activity 3.1Activity 3.1Activity 3.1Activity 3.1Take samples of  iron, copper, 
aluminium and magnesium. Notethe appearance of each sample.
Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them with sand paper
and note their appearance again.Metals, in their pure state, have a shining surface. This property is
called metallic lustre.Activity 3.2Activity 3.2Activity 3.2Activity 3.2Activity 3.2Take small pieces of iron, copper, aluminium, and magnesium.
Try to cut these metals with a sharp knife and note your
observations.Hold a piece of sodium metal with a pair of tongs.
CAUTION: Always handle sodium metal with care. Dry it by
pressing between the folds of a filter paper.
Put it on a watch-glass and try to cut it with a knife.
What do you observe?

Science38You will find that some metals can be beaten into thin sheets. This
property is called malleability. Did you know that gold and silver are the

most malleable metals?Activity 3.3Activity 3.3Activity 3.3Activity 3.3Activity 3.3Take pieces of iron, zinc, lead and copper.
Place any one metal on a block of iron and strike it four or five
times with a hammer. What do you observe?
Repeat with other metals.
Record the change in the shape of these metals.
You will find that metals are generally hard. The hardness varies
from metal to metal.
Activity 3.4Activity 3.4Activity 3.4Activity 3.4Activity 3.4Consider some metals such as iron, copper, aluminium, lead, etc.
Which of the above metals are also available in the form of wires?
The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wires is called ductility.
Gold is the most ductile metal. You will be surprised to know that a wire

of about 2 km length can be drawn from one gram of gold.
It is because of their malleability and ductility that metals can begiven different shapes according to our needs.Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels?Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do

the following Activity to find out the answer.
Activity 3.5Activity 3.5Activity 3.5Activity 3.5Activity 3.5Take an aluminium or copper
wire. Clamp this wire on a
stand, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
Fix a pin to the free end of the

wire using wax.
Heat the wire with a spirit lamp,
candle or a burner near the
place where it is clamped.
What do you observe after some

time?Note your observations. Does
the metal wire melt?
The above activity shows that metals are good conductors of heatand have high melting points. The best conductors of heat are silver and
copper. Lead and mercury are comparatively poor conductors of heat.Do metals also conduct electricity? Let us find out.
Figure 3.1Metals are good

conductors of heat.
Metals and Non-metals39You must have seen that the wires that carry current
in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC)
or a rubber-like material. Why are electric wires coated
with such substances?
What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce
a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface
are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of
metals?3.1.2 Non-metalsIn the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals

as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon,
sulphur, iodine, oxygen, hydrogen, etc. The non-metals are either  solids
or gases except bromine which is a liquid.
Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals?
Let us find out.
Activity 3.6Activity 3.6Activity 3.6Activity 3.6Activity 3.6Set up an electric circuit as shown in Fig. 3.2.Place the metal to be tested in the circuit
between terminals A and B as shown.
Does the bulb glow? What does this indicate?
Figure 3.2Metals are good
conductors of electricity.
Activity 3.7Activity 3.7Activity 3.7Activity 3.7Activity 3.7Collect samples of carbon (coal or graphite), sulphur and iodine.
Carry out the Activities 3.1 to 3.6 with these non-metals and record
your observations.Compile your observations regarding metals and non-metals in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1ElementSymbolType ofHardnessMall
eabilityDuctilityC
onductionS
onoritysurfaceHeat   Electricity
On the bases of the observations recorded in Table 3.1, discuss the
general physical properties of metals and non-metals in the class. You
must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their

physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example Œ
(i)All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature.
In Activity 3.5, you have observed that metals have high melting

Science40points but gallium and caesium have very low melting points.
These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm.
(ii)Iodine is a non-metal but it is lustrous.(iii)Car
bon is a non-metal that can exist in different forms. Each
form is called an allotrope. Diamond, an allotrope of carbon, is
the hardest natural substance known and has a very high melting
and boiling point. Graphite, another allotrope of carbon, is a

conductor of electricity.
(iv)Alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium) are so soft that theycan be cut with a knife. They have low densities and low meltingpoints.Elements can be more clearly classified as metals and non-metalson the basis of their chemical properties.
Activity 3.8Activity 3.8Activity 3.8Activity 3.8Activity 3.8Take a magnesium ribbon and some sulphur powder.
Burn the magnesium ribbon. Collect the ashes formed and dissolve
them in water.
Test the resultant solution with both red and blue litmus paper.
Is the product formed on burning magnesium acidic or basic?
Now burn sulphur powder. Place a test tube over the burning

sulphur to collect the fumes produced.
Add some water to the above test tube and shake.
Test this solution with blue and red litmus paper.
Is the product formed on burning sulphur acidic or basic?
Can you write equations for these reactions?
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Give an example of a metal which
(i)is a liquid at room temperature.
(ii)can be 
easily cut with a knife.
(iii)is the best co
nductor of heat.
(iv)is a poor conductor of heat.
2.Explain the meanings of malleable and ductile.
3.2 CHEMIC3.2 CHEMIC3.2 CHEMIC3.2 CHEMIC3.2 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METALSALSALSALSALSWe will learn about the chemical properties of metals in the following
Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.4. For this, collect the samples of following metals Œ
aluminium, copper, iron, lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium.
 Most non-metals produce acidic oxides when dissolve in water. On
the other hand, most metals, give rise to basic oxides. You will be learning
more about these metal oxides in the next section.

Metals and Non-metals413.2.1 What happens when Metals are burnt in Air?You have seen in Activity 3.8 that magnesium burns in air with a dazzling
white flame. Do all metals react in the same manner? Let us check by
performing the following Activity.Activity 3.9Activity 3.9Activity 3.9Activity 3.9Activity 3.9CAUTION: The following activity needs the teacher™s assistance.
It would be better if students wear eye protection.
Hold any of the samples taken above with a pair of tongs and try

burning over a flame. Repeat with the other metal samples.
Collect the product if formed.
Let the products and the metal surface cool down.
Which metals burn easily?
What flame colour did you observe when the metal burnt?
How does the metal surface appear after burning?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity

towards oxygen.Are the products soluble in water?
Almost all metals combine with oxygen to form metal oxides.
Metal  +  Oxygen 
 Metal oxide
 For example, when copper is heated in air, it combines with oxygen
to form copper(II) oxide, a black oxide.
2Cu  +  O
2    2CuO
(Copper)     (Copper(II) oxide)
Similarly, aluminium forms aluminium oxide.4Al+3O
2  2Al
2O3(Aluminium)(Aluminium oxide)
Recall from Chapter 2, how copper oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid.
We have learnt that metal oxides are basi
c in nature. But some metal
oxides, such as aluminium oxide, zinc oxide, etc., show both acidic as
well as basic behaviour. Such metal oxides which react with both acids as
well as bases to produce salts and water are known as amphoteric oxides.Aluminium oxide reacts in the following manner with acids and bases Œ
Al2O3 + 6HCl
2AlCl3+3H
2OAl2O3 + 2NaOH
2NaAlO2+H2O(Sodiumaluminate) Most metal oxides are insoluble in water but some of these dissolve
in water to form alkalis. Sodium oxide and potassium oxide dissolve in
water to produce alkalis as follows Œ
Na2O(s)+H
2O(l)  2NaOH(aq)
K2O(s)+H
2O(l)  2KOH(aq)

Science42We have observed in Activity 3.9 that all metals do not react with
oxygen at the same rate. Different metals show different reactivities

towards oxygen. Metals such as potassium and sodium react so
vigorously that they catch fire if kept in the open. Hence, to protect them
and to prevent accidental fires, they are kept immersed in kerosene oil.
At ordinary temperature, the surfaces of metals such as magnesium,
aluminium, zinc, lead, etc., are covered with a thin layer of oxide. The
protective oxide layer prevents the metal from further oxidation. Iron
does not burn on heating but iron filings burn vigorously when sprinkled
in the flame of the burner. Copper does not burn, but the hot metal is
coated with a black coloured layer of copper(II) oxide. Silver and gold do
not react with oxygen even at high temperatures.Do You Know?
Anodising is a process of forming a thick oxide layer of aluminium. Aluminium
develops a thin oxide layer when exposed to air. This aluminium oxide coat makes it

resistant to further corrosion.  The resistance can be improved further by making the
oxide layer thicker.  During anodising, a clean aluminium article is made the anode
and is electrolysed with dilute sulphuric acid. The oxygen gas evolved at the anode

reacts with aluminium to make a thicker protective oxide layer.  This oxide layer can
be dyed easily to give aluminium articles an attractive finish.
After performing Activity 3.9, you must have observed that sodium
is the most reactive of the samples of metals taken here. The reaction of
magnesium is less vigorous implying that it is not as reactive as sodium.

But burning in oxygen does not help us to decide about the reactivity ofzinc, iron, copper or lead. Let us see some more reactions to arrive at a
conclusion about the order of reactivity of these metals.
3.2.2 What happens when Metals react with Water?
Activity 3.10Activity 3.10Activity 3.10Activity 3.10Activity 3.10CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher™s assistance.
Collect the samples of the same metals as in Activity 3.9.
Put small pieces of the samples separately in beakers half-filled
with cold water.
Which metals reacted with cold water? Arrange them in the

increasing order of their reactivity with cold water.
Did any metal produce fire on water?
Does any metal start floating after some time?Put the metals that did not react with cold water in beakers
half-filled with hot water.
For the metals that did not react with hot water, arrange the

apparatus as shown in Fig. 3.3 and observe their reaction with steam.
Which metals did not react even with steam?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of reactivity with water.

Metals and Non-metals43Metals react with water and produce a metal oxide and hydrogengas. Metal oxides that are soluble in water dissolve in it to further form
metal hydroxide. But all metals do not react with water.
Metal+W
aterMetal oxide + Hydrogen
Metal oxide+W
aterMetal hydroxideMetals like potassium and sodium react violently with cold water. In
case of sodium and potassium, the reaction is so violent and exothermic
that the evolved hydrogen immediately catches fire.
2K(s)   + 2H
2O(l)  2KOH(aq)  +  H
2(g) + heat energy2Na(s) + 2H
2O(l)  2NaOH(aq) + H
2(g) + heat energy
The reaction of calcium with water is less violent. The heat evolved is
not sufficient for the hydrogen to catch fire.
Ca(s) + 2H2O(l)  Ca(OH)
2(aq) + H2(g)Calcium starts floating because the bubbles of hydrogen gas formed
stick to the surface of the metal.Magnesium does not react with cold water. It reacts with hot waterto form magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen. It also starts floating due
to the bubbles of hydrogen gas sticking to its surface.Metals like aluminium, iron and zinc do not react either with cold orhot water. But they react with steam to form the metal oxide and hydrogen.
2Al(s)+3H
2O(g)  Al
2O3(s) + 3H2(g)3Fe(s)+4H
2O(g)  Fe
3O4(s) + 4H2(g)Metals such as lead, copper, sil
ver and gold do not react with water at all.
3.2.3 What happens when Metals react with Acids?You have already learnt that metals react with acids to give a salt and
hydrogen gas.Figure 3.3 Action of steam on a metal

Science44Metal + Dilute acid  Salt + Hydrogen
But do all metals react in the same manner? Let us find out.
Activity 3.11Activity 3.11Activity 3.11Activity 3.11Activity 3.11Collect all the metal samples except sodium and potassium again.
If the samples are tarnished, rub them clean with sand paper.
CAUTION: Do not take sodium and potassium as they react
vigorously even with cold water.
Put the samples separately in test tubes containing dilute

hydrochloric acid.
Suspend thermometers in the test tubes, so that their bulbs are
dipped in the acid.
Observe the rate of formation of bubbles carefully.
Which metals reacted vigorously with dilute hydrochloric acid?
With which metal did you record the highest temperature?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of reactivity with dilute

acids.Write equations for the reactions of magnesium, aluminium, zinc
and iron with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Hydrogen gas is not evolved when a metal reacts with nitric acid. It is
because HNO3 is a strong oxidising agent. It oxidises the H
2 produced to
water and itself gets reduced to any of the nitrogen oxides (N2O, NO,
NO2). But magnesium (Mg) and manganese (Mn) react with very dilute
HNO3 to evolve H
2 gas.
You must have observed in Activity 3.11, that the rate of formation
of bubbles was the fastest in the case of magnesium. The reaction was
also the most exothermic in this case. The reactivity decreases in the
order Mg > Al > Zn > Fe. In the 
case of copper, no bubbles were seen and
the temperature also remained unchanged. This shows that copper doesnot react with dilute HCl.
Do You Know?
Aqua regia, (Latin for ‚royal water™) is a freshly prepared mixture of concentrated
hydrochloric acid and concentrated nitric acid in the ratio of 3:1. It can dissolve
gold, even though neither of these acids can do so alone. 
Aqua regia is a highly
corrosive, fuming liquid. It is one of the few reagents that is able to dissolve gold andplatinum.3.2.4 How do Metals react with Solutions of other MetalSalts?Activity 3.12Activity 3.12Activity 3.12Activity 3.12Activity 3.12Take a clean wire of copper and an iron nail.
Put the copper wire in a solution of iron sulphate and the iron
nail in a solution of copper sulphate taken in test tubes (Fig. 3.4).
Record your observations after 20 minutes.

Metals and Non-metals45In which test tube did you find that a reaction has occurred?
On what basis can you say that a reaction has actually taken
place?Can you correlate your observations for the Activities 3.9, 3.10

and 3.11?Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction that has taken

place.Name the type of reaction.
Reactive metals can displace lessreactive metals from their compounds in
solution or molten form.
We have seen in the previous sections
that all metals are 
not equally reactive. We
checked the reactivity of various metals

with oxygen, water and acids. But allmetals do not react with these reagents.
So we were not able to put all the metal
samples we had collected in decreasing
order of their reactivity. Displacement

reactions studied in Chapter 1 give betterevidence about the reactivity of metals. Itis simple and easy if metal A displacesmetal B from its solution, it is more reactive than B.
Metal A + Salt solution of B 
 Salt solution of A + Metal B
Which metal, copper or iron, is more reactive according to your
observations in Activity 3.12?
3.2.5 The Reactivity SeriesThe reactivity series is a list of metals arranged in the order of their

decreasing activities. After performing displacement experiments(Activities 1.9 and 3.12), the following series, (Table 3.2) known as the
reactivity or activity series has been developed.Table 3.2 Activity series : Relative reactivities of metalsKPotassiumMost reactive
NaSodium
CaCalcium
MgMagnesium

AlAluminium
ZnZincReactivity decreases
FeIron
PbLead
HHydrogen

CuCopper
HgMercury
AgSilver
AuGoldLeast reactive
Figure 3.4Reaction of metals with
salt solutions
Science46?QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS1.Why is sodium kept immersed in kerosene oil?
2.Write equations for the reactions of
(i)iron with steam
(ii)calcium and pot
assium with water
3.Samples of four metals A, B, C and D were taken and added to the
following solution one by one. The results obtained have been tabulated
as follows.3.3 HOW DO MET3.3 HOW DO MET3.3 HOW DO MET3.3 HOW DO MET3.3 HOW DO METALS AND NON-METALS AND NON-METALS AND NON-METALS AND NON-METALS AND NON-METALS REAALS REAALS REAALS REAALS REACT?CT?CT?CT?CT?In the above activities, you saw the reactions of metals with a number of
reagents. Why do metals react in this manner? Let us recall what we
learnt about the electronic configuration of elements in Class IX. We
learnt that noble gases, which have a completely filled valence shell, showlittle chemical activity. We, therefore, explain the reactivity of elements

as a tendency to attain a completely filled valence shell.Let us have a look at the electronic configuration of noble gases and
some metals and non-metals.We can see from Table 3.3 that a sodium atom has one electron in its
outermost shell. If it loses the electron from its M shell then its L shell
now becomes the outermost shell and that has a stable octet. The nucleus
of this atom still has 11 protons but the number of electrons has

become 10, so there is a net positive charge giving us a sodium cation
Na+. On the other hand chlorine has seven electrons in its outermost shell
Use the Table above to answer the following questions about metals
A, B, C and D.
(i)Which is the most reactive metal?
(ii)What would you observe if B is added to a solution of Coppe
r(II)sulphate?(iii)Arrange the metals A, B, C and D in the order of 
decreasingreactivity.4.Which gas is produced when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a
reactive metal? Write the chemical reaction when iron reacts with dilute

H2SO4.5.What would you observe when zinc is added to a solution of iron(II)
sulphate? Write the chemical reaction that takes place.
MetalIron(II) sulphateCopper(II) sulphateZinc sulphateSilver nitrate
ANo reactionDisplacement
BDisplacementNo reaction
CNo reactionNo reactionNo reactionDisplacement

DNo reactionNo reactionNo reactionNo reaction

Metals and Non-metals47and it requires one more electron to complete its octet. If sodium and chlorine
were to react, the electron lost by sodium could be taken up by chlorine.
After gaining an electron, the chlorine atom gets a unit negative charge,

because its nucleus has 17 protons and there are 18 electrons in its K, Land M shells.  This gives us a chloride anion C1
Œ. So both these elementscan have a give-and-take relation between them as follows (Fig. 3.5).
NaNa+e
2,8,12,8
+(Sodiumcation
)ŒCl+eCl
2,8,72,8,8
(Chloride
anion
)ŒŒFigure 3.5 Formation of sodium chloride
Sodium and chloride ions, being oppositely charged, attract each
other and are held by strong electrostatic forces of attraction to exist as
sodium chloride (NaCl). It should be noted that sodium chloride doesnot exist as molecules but aggregates of oppositely charged ions.
Let us see the formation of one more ionic compound, magnesium
chloride (Fig. 3.6).
Table 3.3 Electronic configuration of some elements
Type ofElementAtomicNumber of
elementnumberelectrons in shells
KLMN
Noble gasesHelium (He)22
Neon (Ne)1028

Argon (Ar)18288
MetalsSodium (Na)11281
Magnesium (Mg)12282
Aluminium (Al)13283
Potassium (K)192881

Calcium (Ca)202882
Non-metalsNitrogen (N)725
Oxygen (O)826
Fluorine (F)927
Phosphorus (P)15285

Sulphur (S)16286
Chlorine (Cl)17287

Science48MgMge
2+(Magnesium
cation
)228228
Œ,,,
Cl+eCl
2,8,72,8,8
(Chloride
anion
)ŒŒFigure 3.6 Formation of magnesium chloride
The compounds formed in this manner by the transfer of electronsfrom a metal to a non-metal are known as ionic compounds or

electrovalent compounds. Can you name the cation and anion presentin MgCl
2?3.3.1 Properties of Ionic CompoundsTo learn about the properties of ionic compounds, let us perform the

following Activity:Activity 3.13Activity 3.13Activity 3.13Activity 3.13Activity 3.13Take samples of sodium chloride, potassium iodide, barium
chloride or any other salt from the science laboratory.
What is the physical state of these salts?
Take a small amount of a sample on a metal spatula and

heat directly on the flame (Fig. 3.7). Repeat with other samples.
What did you observe? Did the samples impart any colour

to the flame? Do these compounds melt?
Try to dissolve the samples in water, petrol and kerosene.

Are they soluble?Make a circuit as shown in Fig. 3.8 and insert the electrodes
into a solution of one salt. What did you observe? Test the
other salt samples too in this manner.
What is your inference about the nature of these

compounds?Figure 3.7Heating a salt sample on a
spatulaFigure 3.8
Testing the conductivity of

a salt solutionTable 3.4 Melting and boiling points of some ionic compounds
IonicMelting pointBoiling point
compound(K)(K)
NaCl10741686
LiCl8871600
CaCl210451900
CaO28503120
MgCl29811685

Metals and Non-metals49You may have observed the following general properties for ionic
compoundsŠ(i)Physical nature: Ionic compounds are solids and are somewhat
hard because of the strong force of attraction between the positive

and negative ions. These compounds are generally brittle andbreak into pieces when pressure is applied.
(ii)Melting and Boiling points: Ionic compounds have high melting
and boiling points (see Table 3.4). This is because a considerableamount of energy is required to break the strong inter-ionic
attraction.(iii)Solubility: Electrovalent compounds are generally soluble in
water and insoluble in solvents such as kerosene, petrol, etc.
(iv)Conduction of Electricity: The conduction of electricity througha solution involves the movement of charged particles. A solution

of an ionic compound in water contains ions, which move to the
opposite electrodes when electricity is passed through the
solution. Ionic compounds in the solid state do not conduct

electricity because movement of ions in the solid is not possible
due to their rigid structure. But ionic compounds conductelectricity in the molten state. This is possible in the molten state

since the elecrostatic forces of attraction between the oppositely

charged ions are overcome due to the heat. Thus, the ions move
freely and conduct electricity.QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.          (i)Write the electron-dot structures for sodium, oxygen and
magnesium.(ii)Show the formation of Na
2O and MgO by the transfer of  electrons.
(iii)What are the ions pr
esent in these compounds?
2.Why do ionic compounds have high melting points?
3.43.43.43.43.4OCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METALSALSALSALSALSThe earth™s crust is the major source of metals. Seawater also containssome soluble salts such as sodium chloride, magnesium chloride, etc.
The elements or compounds, which occur naturally in the earth™s crust,
are known as minerals. At some places, minerals contain a very high

percentage of a particular metal and the metal can be profitably extracted
from it. These minerals are called ores.
3.4.1 Extraction of MetalsYou have learnt about the reactivity series of metals. Having this
knowledge, you can easily understand how a metal is extracted from its

ore. Some metals are found in the earth™s crust in the free state. Some
are found in the form of their compounds. The metals at the bottom of
the activity series are the least reactive. They are often found in a free
Science50state. For example, gold, silver, platinum and copper are found in the
free state. Copper and silver are also found in the combined state as
their sulphide or oxide ores. The metals at the top of the activity series
(K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al) are so reactive that they are never found in

nature as free elements. The metals in the middle of the activity series
(Zn, Fe, Pb, etc.) are moderately reactive. They are found in the earth™s
crust mainly as oxides, sulphides or carbonates. You will find that

the ores of many metals are oxides. This is because oxygen is a very
reactive element and is very abundant on the earth.Thus on the 
basis of reactivity, we can group the metals into the
following three categories (Fig. 3.9) Œ (i) Metals of low reactivity; (ii) Metals
of medium reactivity; (iii) Metals of high reactivity. Different techniques

are to be used for obtaining the metals falling in each category.
KNa
CaMgAlZnFe
PbCuAgAuReduction usingcarbonFound in native
stateElectrolysisFigure 3.9Activity series and
related metallurgyFigure 3.10 Steps involved in the extraction of metals from ores
3.4.2Enrichment of OresOres mined from the earth are usually contaminated with large amounts
of impurities such as soil, sand, etc., called gangue. The impurities must
be removed from the ore prior to the extraction of the metal. The processes
Several steps are involved in the extraction of pure metal fromores. A summary of these steps is given in Fig.3.10. Each step is

explained in detail in the following sections.
Metals and Non-metals51used for removing the gangue from the ore are based on the differences
between the physical or chemical properties of the gangue and the ore.

Different separation techniques are  accordingly employed.
3.4.3Extracting Metals Low in the Activity SeriesMetals low in the activity series are very unreactive. The oxides of these
metals can be  reduced to metals by heating alone. For example, cinnabar
(HgS) is an ore of mercury. When 
it is heated in air, it is first converted
into mercuric oxide (HgO). Mercuric oxide is then reduced to mercury
on further heating.2HgS(s) + 3O(g) 2HgO(s) + 2SO(g)
22Heat
2HgO(s)2Hg(l) + O(g)
2Heat
Similarly, copper which is found as Cu
2S in nature can be obtainedfrom its ore by just heating in air.
2CuS + 3O(g)2CuO(s) + 2SO(g)
2CuO+CuS 
2222
22HeatHeat


6Cu(s) + SO(g)
23.4.4 Extracting Metals in the Middle of the Activity SeriesThe metals in the middle of the activity series such as iron, zinc, lead,
copper, 
etc., are moderately reactive. These are usually present as
sulphides or carbonates in nature. It is easier to obtain a metal from its
oxide, as compared to its sulphides and carbonates. Therefore, prior to

reduction, the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into
metal oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating
strongly in the presence of excess air. This process is known as roasting.
The carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited
air. This process is known as calcina
tion. The chemical reaction that
takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shownas follows ŒRoasting2ZnS(s) + 3O(g)2ZnO(s) + 2SO(g)
22Heat
CalcinationZnCO(s)ZnO(s) + CO(g)
32Heat
The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metals by
using suitable reducing agents such as carbon. For example, when zincoxide is heated with carbon, it is reduced to metallic zinc.
ZnO(s) + C(s)  Zn(s) + CO(g)
You are already familiar with the process of oxidation and reduction
explained in the first Chapter. Obtaining metals from their compounds
is also a reduction process.Besides using carbon (coke) to reduce metal oxides to metals,
sometimes displacement reactions can also be used. The highly reactive

metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium, etc., are used as reducing
Science52agents because they can displace metals of lower reactivity from their
compounds. For example, when manganese dioxide is heated with
aluminium powder, the following reaction takes place Œ
3MnO2(s) + 4Al(s)  3Mn(l) + 2Al
2O3(s) + HeatCan you identify the substances that are getting oxidised
and reduced?These displacement reactions are highly exothermic. The
amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals are produced
in the molten state. In fact, the reaction of iron(III) oxide (Fe
2O3)with aluminium is used to join railway tracks or cracked
machine parts. This reaction is known as the thermit reaction.
Fe2O3(s) + 2Al(s)  2Fe(l) + Al
2O3(s) + Heat3.4.5 Extracting Metals towards the Top of the
Activity SeriesThe metals high up in the reactivity series are very reactive. They cannot
be obtained from their compounds by heating with carbon. For example,
carbon cannot reduce the oxides of sodium, magnesium, calcium,aluminium, etc., to the respective metals. This is because these metalshave more affinity for oxygen than carbon. These metals are obtained
by electrolytic reduction. For example, sodium, magnesium and calcium

are obtained by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides. The metalsare deposited at the cathode (the negatively charged electrode), whereas,
chlorine is liberated at the anode (the positively charged electrode). The

reactions are Œ
At cathodeNa
+ + e
ŒNaAt anode      2Cl
ŒCl2 + 2e
ŒSimilarly, aluminium is obtained by the electrolytic reduction of
aluminium oxide.
3.4.6 Refining of MetalsThe metals produced by various reduction processes
described above are not very pure. They contain

impurities, which must be removed to obtain pure metals.
The most widely used method for refining impure metalsis electrolytic refining.
Electrolytic Refining: 
Many metals, such as copper, zinc,tin, nickel, silver, gold, etc., are refined electrolytically. In

this process, the impure metal is made the anode and a
thin strip of pure metal is made the cathode. A solution ofthe metal salt is used as an electrolyte. The apparatus is
set up as shown in Fig. 3.12. On passing the current
through the electrolyte, the pure metal from the anode

dissolves into the electrolyte. An equivalent amount of pure
Figure 3.11Thermit process forjoining railway tracksFigure 3.12
Electrolytic refini
ng of copper. The
electrolyte is a solution of acidified copper

sulphate. The anode is
 impure copper,
whereas, the cathode is a strip of pure

copper. On 
passing electric current, pure
copper is deposited on the cathode.

Metals and Non-metals53metal from the electrolyte is deposited on the cathode. The soluble
impurities go into the solution, whereas, the insoluble impurities settledown at the bottom of the anode and are known as anode mud.
1.Define the following terms.
(i)Mineral(ii)  Ore(iii)  Gangue
2.Name two metals which are found in nature in the free state.

3.What chemical process is used for obtaining a metal from its oxide?
Activity 3.14Activity 3.14Activity 3.14Activity 3.14Activity 3.14Take three test tubes and place clean iron nails
in each of them.
Label these test tubes A, B and C. Pour some

water in test tube A and cork it.
Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add

about 1 mL of oil and cork it. The oil will float on

water and prevent the air from dissolving in the
water.
Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in

test tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium
chloride will absorb the moisture, if any, from

the air. Leave these test tubes for a few days and
then observe (Fig. 3.13).
Figure 3.13Investigating the conditions under which iron
rusts. In tube A, both air and water are
present. In tube B, there is no air dissolved
in the water. In tube C, the air is dry.
You will observe that iron nails rust in test tube A,
but they do not rust in test tubes B and C. In the test

tube A, the nails are exposed to both air and water. In
the test tube B, the nails are exposed to only water, and
the nails in test tube C are exposed to dry air. 
Whatdoes this tell us about the conditions under which iron
articles rust?QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?3.5 CORROSION3.5 CORROSION3.5 CORROSION3.5 CORROSION3.5 CORROSIONYou hav
e learnt the following about corrosion in Chapter 1
 ŒSilver articles  become black after some time when exposed to air.
This is because it reacts with sulphur in the air to form a coating
of silver sulphide.Copper reacts with moist carbon dioxide in the air and slowly loses
its shiny brown surface and gains a green coat. This green
substance is copper carbonate.Iron when exposed to moist air for a long time acquires a coating
of a brown flaky substance called rust.Let us find ou
t the conditions under which iron rusts.
ABC

Science54Do You Know?
Pure gold, known as 24 carat gold, is very soft. It is, therefore, not suitable for making
jewellery. It is alloyed with either silver or copper to make it hard. Generally, in India,22 carat gold is used for making ornaments. It means that 22 parts of pure gold is
alloyed with 2 parts of either copper or silver.
If one of the metals is mercury, then the alloy is known as anamalgam. The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is
less than that of pure metals. For example, brass, an alloy of copper and

zinc (Cu and Zn), and bronze, an alloy of copper and tin (Cu and Sn), are
not good conductors of electricity whereas copper is used for makingelectrical circuits. Solder, an alloy of lead and tin (Pb and Sn), has a low

melting point and is used for welding electrical wires together.3.5.1 Prevention of CorrosionThe rusting of iron can be prevented by painting, oiling, greasing,
galvanising, chrome plating, anodising or making alloys.Galvanisation is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting
by coating them with a thin layer of zinc. The galvanised article is
protected against rusting even if the zinc coating is broken. Can youreason this out?Alloying is a very good method of improving the properties of a metal.
We can get the desired properties by this method. For example, iron is
the most widely used metal. But it is never used in its pure state. This isbecause pure iron is very soft and stretches easily when hot. But, if it is
mixed with a small amount of carbon (about 0.05 %), it becomes hardand strong. When iron is mixed with nickel and chromium, we get
stainless steel, which is hard and does not rust. Thus, if iron is mixed
with some other substance, its properties change. In fact, the properties
of any metal can be changed if it is mixed with some other substance.
The substance added may be a metal or a non-metal. An alloy is a

homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-

metal. It is prepared by first melting the primary metal, and then,
dissolving the other elements in it in definite proportions. It is then cooledto room temperature.
Iron pillar at Delhi
The wonder of ancient Indian metallurgy
The iron pillar near the Qutub Minar in Delhi was built morethan 1600 years ago by the iron workers of India.  They had

developed a process which prevented iron from rusting. For
its quality of rust resistance it has been examined by scientistsfrom all parts of the world. The iron pillar is 8 m high and

weighs 6 tonnes (6000 kg).More to Know!

Metals and Non-metals55In which cases will you find displacement reactions taking place?
2.Which metals do not corrode easily?

3.What are alloys?
QUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONSQUESTIONS?1.Metallic oxides of zinc, magnesium and copper were heated with the
following metals.
MetalZincMagnesiumCopperZinc oxideMagnesium oxideCopper oxideWhat you have learnt
Elements can be classified as metals and non-metals.Metals are lustrous, malleable, ductile and are good conductors of heat and
electricity. They are solids at room temperature, except mercury which is a liquid.
Metals can form positive ions by losing electrons to non-metals.
Metals combine with oxygen to form basic oxides. Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide
show the properties of both basic as well as acidic oxides. These oxides are known
as amphoteric oxides.Different metals have different reactivities with water and dilute acids.
A list of common metals arranged in order of their decreasing reactivity is known

as an activity series.Metals above hydrogen in the Activity series can displace hydrogen from dilute
acids.A more reactive metal displaces a less reactive metal from its salt solution.
Metals occur in nature as free elements or in the form of their compounds.
The extraction of metals from their ores and then refining them for use is known
as metallurgy.An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a
non-metal.The surface of some metals, such as iron, is corroded when they are exposed to
moist air for a long period of time. This phenomenon is known as corrosion.Non-metals have properties opposite to that of metals. They are neither malleable
nor ductile. They are bad conductors of heat and electricity, except for graphite,
which conducts electricity.

Science56Non-metals form negatively charged ions by gaining electrons when reacting with
metals.Non-metals form oxides which are either acidic or neutral.
Non-metals do not displace hydrogen from dilute acids. They react with hydrogen
to form hydrides.
EXERCISES1.Which of the following pairs will give displacement reactions?
(a)NaCl solution and copper metal
(b)MgCl
2 solution and aluminium metal
(c)FeSO
4 solution and silver metal
(d)AgNO
3 solution and copper metal.
2.Which of the following methods is suitable for preventing an iron frying pan from
rusting?(a)Applying grease

(b)Applying paint
(c)Applying a coating of zinc
(d)All of the above.
3.An element reacts with oxygen to give a compound with a high melting point. This
compound is also soluble in water. The element is likely to be
(a)calcium
(b)carbon
(c)silicon
(d)iron.
4.Food cans are coated with tin and not with zinc because
(a)zinc is costlier than tin.

(b)zinc has a higher melting point than tin.
(c)zinc is more reactive than tin.
(d)zinc is less reactive than tin.
5.You are given a hammer, a battery, a bulb, wires and a switch.
(a)How could you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and
non-metals?(b)Assess the usefulness of these tests in distinguishing between metals and
non-metals.6.What are amphoteric oxides? Give two examples of amphoteric oxides.
7.Name two metals which will displace hydrogen from dilute acids, and two metals
which will not.
Metals and Non-metals578.In the electrolytic refining of a metal M, what would you take as the anode, the
cathode and the electrolyte?9.Pratyush took sulphur powder on a spatula and heated it. He collected the gas
evolved by inverting a test tube over it, as shown in figure below.(a)What will be the action of gas on
(i)dry litmus paper?
(ii)m
oist litmus paper?(b)Write a balanced chemical
equation for the reaction
taking place.10.State two ways to prevent the
rusting of iron.11.What type of oxides are formed when
non-metals combine with oxygen?12.Give reasons
(a)Platinum, gold and silver are
used to make jewellery.
(b)Sodium, potassium and
lithium are stored under oil.
(c)Aluminium is a highly reactive
metal, yet it is used to make
utensils for cooking.
(d)Carbonate and sulphide ores
are usually converted into
oxides during the process ofextraction.13.You must have seen tarnished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or tamarind
juice. Explain why these sour substances are effective in cleaning the vessels.
14.Differentiate between metal and non-metal on the basis of their chemical properties.

15.A man went door to door posing as a goldsmith. He promised to bring back the
glitter of old and dull gold ornaments. An unsuspecting lady gave a set of gold
bangles to him which he dipped in a particular solution. The bangles sparkled

like new but their weight was reduced drastically. The lady was upset but after a
futile argument the man beat a hasty retreat. Can you play the detective to find
out the nature of the solution he had used?16.Give reasons why copper is used to make hot water tanks and not steel (an alloy
of iron).Collection of gas

