Acids, Basesand Salts2CHAPTERYou have learnt in your previous classes that the sour and bittertastes of food are due to acids and bases, respectively, present in them.If someone in the family is suffering from a problem of acidity afterovereating, which of the following would you suggest as a remedyŒ lemonjuice, vinegar or baking soda solution?nWhich property did you think of while choosing the remedy?
Surely you must have used your knowledge about the ability of
acids and bases to nullify each other™s effect.nRecall how we tested sour and bitter substances without tasting
them.You already know that acids are sour in taste and change the colourof blue litmus to red, whereas, bases are bitter and change the colour of
the red litmus to blue. Litmus is a natural indicator, turmeric is anothersuch indicator. Have you noticed that a stain of curry on a white clothbecomes reddish-brown when soap, which is basic in nature, is scrubbedon it? It turns yellow again when the cloth is washed with plenty ofwater. You can also use synthetic indicators such as methyl orange andphenolphthalein to test for acids and bases.In this Chapter, we will study the reactions of acids and bases, howacids and bases cancel out each other™s effects and many more interestingthings that we use and see in our day-to-day life.Do You Know?Litmus solution is a purple dye, which is extracted from lichen, a plant belonging tothe division Thallophyta, and is commonly used as an indicator. When the litmussolution is neither acidic nor basic, its colour is purple. There are many other natural
materials like red cabbage leaves, turmeric, coloured petals of some flowers such as
Hydrangea, Petunia and Geranium, which indicate the presence of acid or base in asolution. These are called acid-base indicators or sometimes simply indicators.
Science182.12.12.12.12.1UNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASES2.1.1 Acids and Bases in the LaboratoryActivity 2.1Activity 2.1Activity 2.1Activity 2.1Activity 2.1These indicators tell us whether a substance is acidic or basic bychange in colour. There are some substances whose odour changes inacidic or basic media. These are called olfactory indicators. Let us tryout some of these indicators.QUESTION?1.You have been provided with three test tubes. One of them containsdistilled water and the other two contain an acidic solution and a basicsolution, respectively. If you are given only red litmus paper, how willyou identify the contents of each test tube?nCollect the following samples from the science laboratoryŒ
hydrochloric acid (HCl),  sulphuric acid (H2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3),acetic acid (CH3COOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calciumhydroxide [Ca(OH)2], potassium hydroxide (KOH), magnesiumhydroxide [Mg(OH)2], and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH).nPut a drop of each of the above solutions on a watch-glass and
test with a drop of the following indicators as shown in Table 2.1.nWhat change in colour did you observe with red litmus, blue litmus,
phenolphthalein and methyl orange solutions for each of thesolutions taken?nTabulate your observations in Table 2.1.Table 2.1SampleRedBluePhenolph-Methylsolutionlitmuslitmus
-thalein     orangesolutionsolutionsolutionsolution
Activity 2.2Activity 2.2Activity 2.2Activity 2.2Activity 2.2nTake some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some
strips of clean cloth. Tie up the bag tightly and leave overnight inthe fridge. The cloth strips can now be used to test for acids andbases.nTake two of these cloth strips and check their odour.nKeep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of dilute HClsolution on one strip and a few drops of dilute NaOH solution onthe other.
Acids, Bases and Salts19Which of these Œ vanilla, onion and clove, can be used as olfactoryindicators on the basis of your observations?Let us do some more activities to understand the chemical propertiesof acids and bases.2.1.2 How do Acids and Bases React with Metals?nRinse both cloth strips with water and again check their odour.nNote your observations.nNow take some dilute vanilla essence and clove oil and check theirodour.nTake some dilute HCl solution in one test tube and dilute NaOHsolution in another. Add a few drops of dilute vanilla essence toboth test tubes and shake well. Check the odour once again and
record changes in odour, if any.nSimilarly, test the change in the odour of clove oil with dilute HCl
and dilute NaOH solutions and record your observations.Activity 2.3Activity 2.3Activity 2.3Activity 2.3Activity 2.3CAUTION: This activity needs the teacher™s assistance.nSet the apparatus as shown in Fig. 2.1.nTake about 5 mL of dilute sulphuric acid in a test tube and add afew pieces of zinc granules to it.nWhat do you observe on the surface of zinc granules?nPass the gas being evolved through the soap solution.nWhy are bubbles  formed in the soap solution?nTake a burning candle near a gas filled bubble.nWhat do you observe?nRepeat this Activity with some more acids like HCl, HNO3 andCH3COOH.nAre the observations in all the cases the same or different?Figure 2.1Reaction of zinc granules with dilute sulphuric acid and testing hydrogengas by burning
Science20 Note that the metal in the above reactions displaces hydrogen fromthe acids. This is seen as hydrogen gas. The metal combines with theremaining part of the acid and forms a compound called a salt. Thus,the reaction of a metal with an acid can be summarised as ŒAcid + Metal ® Salt + Hydrogen gasCan you now write the equations for the reactions you have observed?Activity 2.4Activity 2.4Activity 2.4Activity 2.4Activity 2.4The reactions occurring in the above Activity are written as ŒTest tube A: NaCOHCl(aq)Cl(aq)HO(l)+CO
23
22
(s)Na(g)
+®+
22
Test tube B: NaHCOHCl(aq)Cl(aq)HO(l)+CO
322
(s)Na(g)
+®+
On passing the carbon dioxide gas evolved through lime water,Ca(OH)CO
HO(l)
22
2(aq)(g)CaCOs
3+®+
()
(Lime water)(White precipitate)nPlace a few pieces of granulated zinc metal in a test tube.nAdd 2 mL of sodium hydroxide solution and warm the contents
of the test tube.nRepeat the rest of the steps as in Activity 2.3 and record your
observations.The reaction that takes place can be written as follows.2222
NaOHZnNaZnOH
Sodiumzincate
+®+
()You find again that hydrogen is formed in the reaction. However,such reactions are not possible with all metals.2.1.3 How do Metal Carbonates and Metal  Hydrogencarbonates React with Acids?Activity 2.5Activity 2.5Activity 2.5Activity 2.5Activity 2.5nTake two test tubes, label them as Aand B.nTake about 0.5 g of sodium carbonate
(Na2CO3) in test tube A and about0.5 g of sodium hydrogencarbonate(NaHCO3) in test tube B.nAdd about 2 mL of dilute HCl to both
the test tubes.nWhat do you observe?nPass the gas produced in each case
through lime water (calciumhydroxide solution) as shown inFig. 2.2 and record your observations.Figure 2.2Passing carbon dioxide gas
through calcium hydroxide
solution
Acids, Bases and Salts21Activity 2.6Activity 2.6Activity 2.6Activity 2.6Activity 2.6nTake about 2 mL of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and addtwo drops of phenolphthalein solution.nWhat is the colour of the solution?nAdd dilute HCl solution to the above solution drop by drop.nIs there any colour change for the reaction mixture?nWhy did the colour of phenolphthalein change after the addition
of an acid?nNow add a few drops of NaOH to the above mixture.nDoes the pink colour of phenolphthalein reappear?nWhy do you think this has happened?On passing excess carbon dioxide the following reaction takes place:CaCOsCa(HCOaq
33())()
+®
HO(l)+ CO(g) 
222
(Soluble in water)Limestone, chalk and marble are different forms of calcium carbonate.All metal carbonates and hydrogencarbonates react with acids to give acorresponding salt, carbon dioxide and water.Thus, the reaction can be summarised as ŒIn the above Activity, we have observed that the effect of a base isnullified by an acid and vice-versa. The reaction taking place is written as ŒNaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) ® NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water isknown as a neutralisation reaction. In general, a neutralisation reactioncan be written as ŒBase + Acid ® Salt + Water2.1.5 Reaction of Metallic Oxides with AcidsActivity 2.7Activity 2.7Activity 2.7Activity 2.7Activity 2.7nTake a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and add dilutehydrochloric acid slowly while stirring.nNote the colour of the solution. What has happened to the copperoxide?You will notice that the colour of the solution becomes blue-greenand the copper oxide dissolves. The blue-green colour of the solution isdue to the formation of copper(II) chloride in the reaction. The generalreaction between a metal oxide and an acid can be written as ŒMetal oxide + Acid ® Salt + WaterMetal carbonate/Metal hydrogencarbonate + Acid ® Salt + Carbon dioxide + Water2.1.4 How do Acids and Bases React with each other?
Science22Now write and balance the equation for the above reaction. Sincemetallic oxides react with acids to give salts and water, similar to thereaction of a base with an acid, metallic oxides are said to be basic oxides.2.1.6 Reaction of a Non-metallic Oxide with BaseYou saw the reaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide(lime water) in Activity 2.5. Calcium hydroxide, which is a base, reactswith carbon dioxide to produce a salt and water. Since this is similar tothe reaction between a base and an acid, we can conclude that non-
metallic oxides are acidic in nature.QUESTIONS?1.Why should curd and sour substances not be kept in brass and copper
vessels?2.Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal?Illustrate with an example. How will you test for the presence ofthis gas?3.Metal compound A reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce
effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle. Write abalanced chemical equation for the reaction if one of the compoundsformed is calcium chloride.2.2 WHA2.2 WHA2.2 WHA2.2 WHA2.2 WHAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAVE INVE INVE INVE INVE INCOMMON?COMMON?COMMON?COMMON?COMMON?In Section 2.1 we have seen that all acids have similar chemicalproperties. What leads to this similarity in properties? We saw in Activity2.3 that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, sohydrogen seems to be common to all acids. Let us perform an Activity toinvestigate whether all compounds containing hydrogen are acidic.Activity 2.8Activity 2.8Activity 2.8Activity 2.8Activity 2.8nTake solutions of glucose, alcohol,
hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, etc.nFix two nails on a cork, and place the cork ina 100 mL beaker.nConnect the nails to the two terminals of a
6 volt battery through a bulb and a switch, asshown in Fig. 2.3.nNow pour some dilute HCl in the beaker andswitch on the current.nRepeat with dilute sulphuric acid.nWhat do you observe?nRepeat the experiment separately with
glucose and alcohol solutions. What do you
observe now?nDoes the bulb glow in all cases?Figure 2.3
Acid solution in water
conducts electricity
Acids, Bases and Salts23The bulb will start glowing in the case of acids, as shown in Fig. 2.3.But you will observe that glucose and alcohol solutions do not conductelectricity. Glowing of the bulb indicates that there is a flow of electriccurrent through the solution. The electric current is carried through thesolution by ions.Since the cation present in acids is H+, this suggests that acidsproduce hydrogen ions, H+(aq), in solution, which are responsible fortheir acidic properties.Repeat the same Activity using alkalis such as sodium hydroxide,calcium hydroxide, etc. What can you conclude from the results of thisActivity?2.2.1 What Happens to an Acid or a Base in a Water Solution?Do acids produce ions only in aqueous solution? Let us test this.Activity 2.9Activity 2.9Activity 2.9Activity 2.9Activity 2.9nTake about 1g solid NaCl in a clean anddry test tube and set up the apparatus asshown in Fig. 2.4.nAdd some concentrated sulphuric acid tothe test tube.nWhat do you observe? Is there a gas coming
out of the delivery tube?nTest the gas evolved successively with dry
and wet blue litmus paper.nIn which case does the litmus paper change
colour?nOn the basis of the above Activity, what doyou infer about the acidic character of:(i)dry HCl gas(ii)HCl solution?Figure 2.4 Preparation of HCl gasThis experiment suggests that hydrogen ions in HCl are producedin the presence of water. The separation of H+ ion from HCl moleculescannot occur in the absence of water.HCl + H2O ® H3O+ + ClŒHydrogen ions cannot exist alone, but they exist after combiningwith water molecules. Thus hydrogen ions must always be shown as
H+(aq) or hydronium ion (H3O+).H+ + H2O ® H3O+We have seen that acids give H3O+ or H+(aq) ion in water. Let us seewhat happens when a base is dissolved in water.NaOH(s) Na(aq)+OH(aq)
HO
2¾®
¾¾¾
+Œ
Note to teachers: If the climate is very humid, you will have to pass the gas producedthrough a guard tube (drying tube) containing calcium chloride to dry the gas.
Science24KOH(s) K(aq)+OH(aq)
HO
2+¾®
¾¾¾
ŒMg(OH)(s) Mg(aq)+OH(aq)
22HO
2¾®
¾¾¾
+Œ
2Bases generate hydroxide (OHŒ) ions in water. Bases which are solublein water are called alkalis.Do YouKnow?All bases do not dissolve in water. An alkali is a base that dissolves in water. Theyare soapy to touch, bitter and corrosive. Never taste or touch them as they maycause harm. Which of the bases in the Table 2.1 are alkalis?Now as we have identified that all acids generate H+(aq) and allbases generate OHŒ(aq), we can view the neutralisation reaction asfollows ŒAcid + Base ® Salt + WaterH  X + M  OH ® MX + HOHH+(aq) + OHŒ (aq) ® H2O(l)Let us see what is involved when water is mixed with an acid or a base.Activity 2.10Activity 2.10Activity 2.10Activity 2.10Activity 2.10nTake 10 mL water in a beaker.nAdd a few drops of concentrated H2SO4 to it and swirl thebeaker slowly.nTouch the base of the beaker.nIs there a change in temperature?nIs this an exothermic or endothermic process?nRepeat the above Activity with sodium hydroxide pellets
and record your observations.Figure 2.5Warning sign displayedon containers containingconcentrated acids andbasesThe process of dissolving an acid or a base in water is a highlyexothermic one. Care must be taken while mixing concentrated nitricacid or sulphuric acid with water. The acid must always be added slowlyto water with constant stirring. If water is added to a concentrated acid,the heat generated may cause the mixture to splash out and cause burns.
The glass container may also break due to excessive local heating. Lookout for the warning sign (shown in Fig. 2.5) on the can of concentratedsulphuric acid and on the bottle of sodium hydroxide pellets.Mixing an acid or base with water results in decrease in theconcentration of ions (H3O+/OHŒ) per unit volume. Such a process iscalled dilution and the acid or the base is said to be diluted.
Acids, Bases and Salts252.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?2.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?2.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?2.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?2.3 HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?We know how acid-base indicators can be used to distinguish betweenan acid and a base. We have also learnt in the previous section aboutdilution and decrease in concentration of H+ or OHŒ ions in solutions.Can we quantitatively find the amount of these ions present in a solution?Can we judge how strong a given acid or base is?We can do this by making use of a universal indicator, which is amixture of several indicators. The universal indicator shows differentcolours at different concentrations of hydrogen ions in a solution.A scale for measuring hydrogen ion concentration in a solution, calledpH scale has been developed. The p in pH stands for ‚potenz™ in German,meaning power. On the pH scale we can measure pH generally from0 (very acidic) to 14 (very alkaline). pH should be thought of simply as anumber which indicates the acidic or basic nature of a solution. Higherthe hydronium ion concentration, lower is the pH value.The pH of a neutral solution is 7. Values less than 7 on the pH scalerepresent an acidic solution. As the pH value increases from 7 to 14, itrepresents an increase in OHŒ ion concentration in the solution, that is,increase in the strength of alkali (Fig. 2.6). Generally paper impregnated
with the universal indicator is used for measuring pH.QUESTIONS?1.Why do HCl, HNO3, etc., show acidic characters in aqueous solutionswhile solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidiccharacter?2.Why does an aqueous solution of an acid conduct electricity?3.Why does dry HCl gas not change the colour of the dry litmus paper?4.While diluting an acid, why is it recommended that the acid should be
added to water and not water to the acid?5.How is the concentration of hydronium ions (H3O+) affected when asolution of an acid is diluted?6.How is the concentration of hydroxide ions (OHŒ) affected when excessbase is dissolved in a solution of sodium hydroxide?Figure 2.6 Variation of pH with the change in concentration of H+(aq) and OHŒ(aq) ions
Science26Activity 2.11Activity 2.11Activity 2.11Activity 2.11Activity 2.11nTest the pH valuesof solutions given inTable 2.2.nRecord your observations.nWhat is the nature of each
substance on the basis ofyour observations?Figure 2.7 pH of some common substances shown on a pH paper (colours are only a rough guide)The strength of acids and bases depends on the number of H+ ionsand OHŒ ions produced, respectively. If we take hydrochloric acid andacetic acid of the same concentration, say one molar, then these producedifferent amounts of hydrogen ions. Acids that give rise to more H+ ionsare said to be strong acids, and acids that give less H+ ions are said to beweak acids. Can you now say what weak and strong bases are?2.3.1 Impor2.3.1 Impor2.3.1 Impor2.3.1 Impor2.3.1 Importance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Everyday Lifeyday Lifeyday Lifeyday Lifeyday LifeAre plants and animals pH sensitive?Our body works within the pH range of 7.0 to 7.8. Living organisms cansurvive only in a narrow range of pH change. When pH of rain water is
less than 5.6, it is called acid rain. When acid rain flows into the rivers, itlowers the pH of the river water. The survival of aquatic life in such riversbecomes difficult.Table 2.2 S.SolutionColour ofApprox-Nature ofNo.pH paper-imatesubstancepH value1Saliva (before meal)2Saliva (after meal)3Lemon juice4Colourless aerateddrink5Carrot juice6Coffee7Tomato juice8Tap water91M NaOH101M HCl
Acids, Bases and Salts27What is the pH of the soil in your backyard?Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth. To find outthe pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the soilfrom various places and check the pH in the manner described below in
Activity 2.12. Also, you can note down which plants are growing in theregion from which you have collected the soil.Acids in other planetsThe atmosphere of venus is made up of thick white and yellowish clouds ofsulphuric acid. Do you think life can exist on this planet?Activity 2.12Activity 2.12Activity 2.12Activity 2.12Activity 2.12nPut about 2 g soil in a test tube and add 5 mL water to it.nShake the contents of the test tube.nFilter the contents and collect the filtrate in a test tube.nCheck the pH of this filtrate with the help of universalindicator paper.nWhat can you conclude about the ideal soil pH for the growth of
plants in your region?pH in our digestive systemIt is very interesting to note that our stomach produces hydrochloric
acid. It helps in the digestion of food without harming the stomach.
During indigestion the stomach produces too much acid and this causes
pain and irritation. To get rid of this pain, people use bases called
antacids. One such remedy must have been suggested by you at the
beginning of this Chapter. These antacids neutralise the excess acid.Magnesium hydroxide (Milk of magnesia), a mild base, is often used for
this purpose.pH change as the cause of tooth decayTooth decay starts when the pH of the mouth is lower than 5.5. Tooth
enamel, made up of calcium phosphate is the hardest substance in the
body. It does not dissolve in water, but is corroded when the pH in themouth is below 5.5. Bacteria present in the mouth produce acids by
degradation of sugar and food particles remaining in the mouth after
eating. The best way to prevent this is to clean the mouth after eating
food. Using toothpastes, which are generally basic, for cleaning the teeth
can neutralise the excess acid and prevent tooth decay.Self defence by animals and plants through chemical warfareHave you ever been stung by a honey-bee? Bee-sting leaves an acidwhich  causes pain and irritation. Use of a mild base like baking soda
on the stung area gives relief. Stinging hair of nettle leaves inject
methanoic acid causing burning pain.Do YouKnow?
Science282.4 MORE ABOUT SAL2.4 MORE ABOUT SAL2.4 MORE ABOUT SAL2.4 MORE ABOUT SAL2.4 MORE ABOUT SALTSTSTSTSTSIn the previous sections we have seen the formation of salts duringvarious reactions. Let us understand more about their preparation,
properties and uses.2.4.1 Family of SaltsActivity 2.13Activity 2.13Activity 2.13Activity 2.13Activity 2.13nWrite the formulae of the salts given below.Potassium sulphate, sodium sulphate, calcium sulphate,magnesium sulphate, copper sulphate, sodium chloride, sodiumnitrate, sodium carbonate and ammonium chloride.Nature provides neutralisation optionsNettle is a herbaceous plant which grows in the wild. Its leaves have stinging hair,which cause painful stings when touched accidentally. This is due to the methanoicacid secreted by them. A traditional remedy is rubbing thearea with the leaf of the dock plant, which often grows besidethe nettle in the wild. Can you guess the nature of the dockplant? So next time you know what to look out for if you
accidentally touch a nettle plant while trekking. Are you awareof any other effective traditional remedies for such stings?Table 2.3 Some naturally occurring acidsNatural sourceAcidNatural sourceAcidVinegarAcetic acidSour milk (Curd)Lactic acidOrangeCitric acidLemonCitric acidTamarindTartaric acidAnt stingMethanoic acidTomatoOxalic acidNettle stingMethanoic acidQUESTIONS1.You have two solutions, A and B. The pH of solution A is 6 and pH ofsolution B is 8. Which solution has more hydrogen ion concentration?
Which of this is acidic and which one is basic?2.What effect does the concentration of H+(aq) ions have on the nature of thesolution?3.Do basic solutions also have H+(aq) ions? If yes, then why are these basic?4.Under what soil condition do you think a farmer would treat the soil of his
fields with quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) orchalk (calcium carbonate)??Do You Know?
Acids, Bases and Salts29nIdentify the acids and bases from which the above salts may beobtained.nSalts having the same positive or negative radicals are said tobelong to a family.  For example, NaCl and Na2SO4 belong to thefamily of sodium salts.  Similarly, NaCl and KCl belong to the family
of chloride salts.  How many families can you identify among thesalts given in this Activity?2.4.2 pH of SaltsActivity 2.14Activity 2.14Activity 2.14Activity 2.14Activity 2.14nCollect the following salt samples Œ sodium chloride, potassiumnitrate, aluminium chloride, zinc sulphate, copper sulphate,
sodium acetate, sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate(some other salts available can also be taken).nCheck their solubility in water (use distilled water only).nCheck the action of these solutions on litmus and find the pHusing a pH paper.nWhich of the salts are acidic, basic or neutral?nIdentify the acid or base used to form the salt.nReport your observations in Table 2.4.Salts of a strong acid and a strong baseare neutral with pH value of 7. On the otherhand, salts of a strong acid and weak baseare acidic with pH value less than 7 and thoseof a strong base and weak acid are basic innature, with pH value more than 7.2.4.3 Chemicals from Common SaltBy now you have learnt that the salt formed
by the combination of hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide solution is called sodiumchloride. This is the salt that you use in food.You must have observed in the above Activitythat it is a neutral salt.Seawater contains many salts dissolvedin it. Sodium chloride is separated from thesesalts. Deposits of solid salt are also found inseveral parts of the world. These large crystalsare often brown due to impurities. This iscalled rock salt. Beds of rock salt were formed
when seas of bygone ages dried up. Rock saltis mined like coal.You must have heard about Mahatma Gandhi™s Dandi March. Didyou know that sodium chloride was such an important symbol in ourstruggle for freedom?Table 2.4SaltpHAcid usedBase used
Science30Common salt Š A raw material for chemicalsThe common salt thus obtained is an important raw material for variousmaterials of daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washingsoda, bleaching powder and many more. Let us see how one substance
is used for making all these different substances.Sodium hydroxideWhen electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodiumchloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. The
process is called the chlor-alkali process because of the products formedŒchlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l) ® 2NaOH(aq) + Cl2(g) + H2(g)Chlorine gas is given off at the anode, and hydrogen gas at the cathode.Sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode. The threeproducts produced in this process are all useful. Figure 2.8 shows thedifferent uses of these products.Bleaching powder
You have already come to know that chlorine is produced during theelectrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine). This chlorine gas is used
for the manufacture of bleaching powder. Bleaching powder is producedby the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH)2]. Bleaching powderis represented as CaOCl2, though the actual composition is quitecomplex.Ca(OH)2 + Cl2 ® CaOCl2 + H2OFigure 2.8 Important products from the chlor-alkali process
Acids, Bases and Salts31Bleaching powder is used Œ(i)for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry, for bleachingwood pulp in paper factories and for bleaching washed clothes
in laundry;(ii)as an oxidising agent in many chemical industries; and(iii)for disinfecting drinking water to make it free of germs.Baking sodaThe soda commonly used in the kitchen for making tasty crispy pakorasis baking soda. Sometimes it is added for faster cooking. The chemical
name of the compound is sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3). It isproduced using sodium chloride as one of the raw materials.NaCl+HO+CO+NHNHCl+NaHCO
223
43®(Ammonium(Sodiumchloride)hydrogencarbonate)Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Activity 2.14?Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mildnon-corrosive basic salt. The following reaction takes place when it isheated during cooking Œ2NaHCONaCO+HO+CO
32322
Heat
¾®
¾¾¾
(Sodium(Sodium
hydrogencarbonate)carbonate)Sodium hydrogencarbonate has got various uses in the household.Uses of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3)(i)For making baking powder, which is a mixture of baking soda(sodium hydrogencarbonate) and a mild edible acid such as
tartaric acid. When baking powder is heated or mixed in water,the following reaction takes place ŒNaHCO3 + H+      ®     CO2 + H2O + Sodium salt of acid         (From any acid)Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction causes bread or caketo rise making them soft and spongy.(ii)Sodium hydrogencarbonate is also an ingredient in antacids.Being alkaline, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach andprovides relief.(iii)It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers.Washing sodaAnother chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is
Na2CO3.10H2O (washing soda). You have seen above that sodiumcarbonate can be obtained by heating baking soda; recrystallisation of
sodium carbonate gives washing soda. It is also a basic salt.NaCOHONaCOHO
Sodium
carbonate
232232
1010
+®
.()
Science32What does 10H2O signify? Does it make Na2CO3 wet? We will addressthis question in the next section.Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate are usefulchemicals for many industrial processes as well.Uses of washing soda(i)Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap andpaper industries.(ii)It is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax.(iii)Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic
purposes.(iv)It is used for removing permanent hardness of water.2.4.4 Are the Crystals of Salts really Dry?Activity 2.15Activity 2.15Activity 2.15Activity 2.15Activity 2.15nHeat a few crystals of copper sulphatein a dry boiling tube.nWhat is the colour of the coppersulphate after heating?nDo you notice water droplets in the
boiling tube? Where have these comefrom?nAdd 2-3 drops of  water on the sampleof copper sulphate obtained afterheating.nWhat do you observe? Is the blue
colour of copper sulphate restored?Figure 2.9Removing waterof crystallisationCopper sulphate crystals which seem to be dry contain water ofcrystallisation. When we heat the crystals, this water is removed and thesalt turns white.If you moisten the crystals again with water, you will find that bluecolour of the crystals reappears.Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules presentin one formula unit of a salt. Five water molecules are present in one
formula unit of copper sulphate. Chemical formula for hydrated coppersulphate is Cu SO4. 5H2O. Now you would be able to answer the questionwhether the molecule of Na2CO3.10H2O is wet.One other salt, which possesses water of crystallisation is gypsum.It has two water molecules as water of cyrstallisation. It has the formulaCaSO4.2H2O. Let us look into the use of this salt.Plaster of Paris
On heating gypsum at 373 K, it loses water molecules and becomescalcium sulphate hemihydrate (42
1CaSO.HO
2). This is called Plaster of
Acids, Bases and Salts33Paris, the substance which doctors use as plaster for supportingfractured bones in the right position. Plaster of Paris is a white powderand on mixing with water, it changes to gypsum once again giving ahard solid mass.CaSO.
12HO+1
12HOCaSO.2HO
42242
(PlasterofParis
)Gypsum
)®(Note that only half a water molecule is shown to be attached as waterof crystallisation. How can you get half a water molecule? It is written in
this form because two formula units of CaSO4 share one molecule ofwater. Plaster of Paris is used for making toys, materials for decorationand for making surfaces smooth. Try to find out why is calcium sulphatehemihydrate called ‚Plaster of Paris™ ?1.What is the common name of the compound CaOCl2?2.Name the substance which on treatment with chlorine yields bleachingpowder.3.Name the sodium compound which is used for softening hard water.4.What will happen if a solution of sodium hydrocarbonate is heated?Give the equation of the reaction involved.5.Write an equation to show the reaction between Plaster of Paris andwater.QUESTIONS?What you have learntnAcid-base indicators are dyes or mixtures of dyes which are used to indicate thepresence of acids and bases.nAcidic nature of a substance is due to the formation of H+(aq) ions in solution.Formation of OHŒ(aq) ions in solution is responsible for the basic nature of asubstance.nWhen an acid reacts with a metal, hydrogen gas is evolved and a corresponding
salt is formed.nWhen a base reacts with a metal, along with the evolution of hydrogen gas a salt is
formed which has a negative ion composed of the metal and oxygen.nWhen an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogencarbonate, it givesthe corresponding salt, carbon dioxide gas and water.nAcidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce
hydrogen and hydroxide ions respectively.
Science34nThe strength of an acid or an alkali can be tested by using a scale called the pHscale (0-14) which gives the measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.nA neutral solution has a pH of exactly 7, while an acidic solution has a pH lessthan 7 and a basic solution a pH more than 7.nLiving beings carry out their metabolic activities within an optimal pH range.nMixing concentrated acids or bases with water is a highly exothermic process.nAcids and bases neutralise each other to form corresponding salts and water.nWater of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules chemically attachedto each formula unit of a salt in its crystalline form.nSalts have various uses in everyday life and in industries.EXERCISES1. A solution turns red litmus blue, its pH is likely to be(a)1(b)4(c)5(d)102.A solution reacts with crushed egg-shells to give a gas that turns lime-water milky.
The solution contains(a)NaCl(b)HCl(c)LiCl(d)KCl3.10 mL of a solution of NaOH is found to be completely neutralised by 8 mL of agiven solution of HCl. If we take 20 mL of the same solution of NaOH, the amountHCl solution (the same solution as before) required to neutralise it will be(a)4 mL(b)8 mL(c)12 mL(d)16 mL4.Which one of the following types of medicines is used for treating indigestion?(a)Antibiotic(b)Analgesic(c)Antacid(d)Antiseptic5.Write word equations and then balanced equations for the reaction takingplace when Œ(a)dilute sulphuric acid reacts with zinc granules.(b)dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium ribbon.(c)dilute sulphuric acid reacts with aluminium powder.(d)dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with iron filings.6.Compounds such as alcohols and glucose also contain hydrogen but are not
categorised as acids. Describe an Activity to prove it.7.Why does distilled water not conduct electricity, whereas rain water does?
Acids, Bases and Salts358.Why do acids not show acidic behaviour in the absence of water?9.Five solutions A,B,C,D and E when tested with universal indicator showed pH as4,1,11,7 and 9, respectively. Which solution is(a)neutral?(b)strongly alkaline?(c)strongly acidic?(d)weakly acidic?(e)weakly alkaline?Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen-ion concentration.10.Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B. Hydrochloric
acid (HCl) is added to test tube A, while acetic acid (CH3COOH) is added to testtube B. Amount and concentration taken for both the acids are same. In which test
tube will the fizzing occur more vigorously and why?11.Fresh milk has a pH of 6. How do you think the pH will change as it turns into
curd? Explain your answer.12.A milkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk.(a)Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from 6 to slightly alkaline?(b)Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd?13.Plaster of Paris should be stored in a moisture-proof container. Explain why?14.What is a neutralisation reaction? Give two examples.15.Give two important uses of  washing soda and baking soda.(I) Prepare your own indicatornCrush beetroot in a mortar.nAdd sufficient water to obtain the extract.nFilter the extract by the procedure learnt by you in earlier classes.nCollect the filtrate to test the substances you may have tasted earlier.nArrange four test tubes in a test tube stand and label them as A,B,C and D. Pour2 mL each of lemon juice solution, soda-water, vinegar and baking soda solutionin them respectively.nPut 2-3 drops of the beetroot extract in each test tube and note the colour changeif any. Write your observation in a Table.nYou can prepare indicators by using other natural materials like extracts of redcabbage leaves, coloured petals of some flowers such as Petunia, Hydrangea andGeranium.Group  Activity
Science36(II) Preparing a soda-acid fire extinguisherThe reaction of acids with metal hydrogencarbonates is used in the fire extinguisherswhich produce carbon dioxide.nTake 20 mL of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3) solution in a wash-bottle.nSuspend an ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid in the wash-bottle(Fig. 2.10).nClose the mouth of the wash-bottle.nTilt the wash-bottle so that the acid from the ignition tube mixes with the sodiumhydrogencarbonate solution below.nYou will notice discharge coming out of the nozzle.nDirect this discharge on a burning candle. What happens?Figure 2.10(a) Ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid suspended in a wash-bottle containingsodium hydrogencarbonate, (b) Discharge coming out of the nozzle
