Periodic Classificationof Elements5CHAPTERIn Class IX we have learnt that matter around us is present in the form
of elements, compounds and mixtures and the elements contain atomsof only one type. Do you know how many elements are known till date?

At present, 118 elements are known to us. All these have different

properties. Out of these 118, only 98 are naturally occurring.
As different elements were being discovered, scientists gathered more
and more information about the properties of these elements. They found
it difficult to organise all that was known about the elements. They started

looking for some pattern in their properties, on the basis of which they
could study such a large number of elements with ease.5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.1 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS Œ EARLOS Œ EARLOS Œ EARLOS Œ EARLOS Œ EARLYYYYYAAAAATTEMPTS ATTEMPTS ATTEMPTS ATTEMPTS ATTEMPTS AT THE CLT THE CLT THE CLT THE CLT THE CLASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICASSIFICAAAAATION OFTION OFTION OFTION OFTION OFELEMENTSELEMENTSELEMENTSELEMENTSELEMENTSWe have been learning how various things or living beings can
be classified on the basis of their properties. Even in other

situations, we come across instances of organisation based

on some properties. For example, in a shop, soaps are kept
together at one place while biscuits are kept together elsewhere.

Even among soaps, bathing soaps are stacked separately from
washing soaps. Similarly, scientists made several attempts to
classify elements according to their properties and obtain an

orderly arrangement out of chaos.
The earliest attempt to classify the elements resulted in
grouping the then known elements as metals and non-metals.

Later further classifications were tried out as our knowledge

of elements and their properties increased.
5.1.1 Döbereiner™s Triads
In the year 1817, Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner, a German

chemist, tried to arrange the elements with similar properties into groups.
He identified some groups having three elements each. So he called these

groups ‚triads™. Döbereiner showed that when the three elements in a
Figure 5.1Imagine you and your friends have
found pieces of an old map to reach
a treasure. Woul
d it be easy orchaotic to find the way to the

treasure? Similar chaos was therein Chemistry as elements were
known but there was no clue as to
how to classify and study about them.

Science80triad were written in the order of increasing atomic masses; the atomic
mass of the middle element was roughly the average of the atomic masses

of the other two elements.For example, take the triad consisting of lithium (Li), sodium (Na)
and potassium (K) with the respective atomic masses 6.9, 23.0 and 39.0.
What is the average of the atomic masses of Li and K? How does this

compare with the atomic mass of Na?
Given below (Table 5.1) are some groups of three elements. These
elements are arranged downwards in order of increasing atomic masses.Can you find out which of these groups form Döbereiner triads?
Table 5.1Group AAtomi
cGroup BAtomicGroup CAtomic
elementmassel
ementmasselementsmassN14.0Ca40.1Cl35. 5
P31.0Sr87.6Br79.9
As74.9Ba137.3I126.9
You will find that groups B and C form Döbereiner triads. Döbereiner
could identify only three triads from the elements known at that time
(Table 5.2). Hence, this system of classification into triads was not found

to be useful.
Table 5.2
Döbereiner™s triadsJohann Wolfgang Döbereiner (1780-1849)
Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner studied as a

pharmacist at Münchberg in Germany, and then

studied chemistry at Strasbourg. Eventually he

became a professor of chemistry and pharmacy
at the University of Jena. Döbereiner made the
first observations on platinum as a catalyst and

discovered similar triads of elements which led to

the development of the Periodic Table of elements.
5.1.2 Newlands™ Law of OctavesThe attempts of Döbereiner encouraged other chemists to correlate the
properties of elements with their atomic masses. In 1866, John Newlands,
an English scientist, arranged the then known elements in the order ofincreasing atomic masses. He started with the element having the lowest

atomic mass (hydrogen) and ended at thorium which was the 56
thelement. He found that every eighth element had properties similar to

that of the first. He compared this to the octaves found in music.
Therefore, he called it the ‚Law of Octaves™. It is known as ‚Newlands™
Law of Octaves™. In Newlands™ Octaves, the properties of lithium and

sodium were found to be the same. Sodium is the eighth element after

lithium. Similarly, beryllium and magnesium resemble each other. A

part of the original form of Newlands™ Octaves is given in Table 5.3.
LiCaCl
NaSrBr
KBaI

Periodic Classification of Elements81Are you familiar with musical notes?In the Indian system of music, there are seven musical notes in a scale Œ 
sa, re, ga, ma, pa,
da, ni. In the west, they use the notations Œ 
do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti. The notes in a scale are
separated by whole and half-step frequency intervals of tones and semitones. A musician

uses these notes for composing the music of a song. Naturally, there must be some repetition

of notes. Every eighth note is similar to the first one and it is the first note of the next scale.
It was found that the Law of Octaves was applicable only upto
calcium, as after calcium every eighth element did not possess
properties similar to that of the first.
It was assumed by Newlands that only 56 elements existed in nature

and no more elements would be discovered in the future. But, later

on, several new elements were discovered, whose properties did not
fit into the Law of Octaves.
In order to fit elements into his Table, Newlands adjusted two elementsin the same slot, but also put some unlike elements under the same

note. Can you find examples of these from Table 5.3? Note that cobalt
and nickel are in the same slot and these are placed in the samecolumn as fluorine, chlorine and bromine which have very different

properties than these elements. Iron, which resembles cobalt and
nickel in properties, has been placed far away from these elements.
Thus, Newlands™ Law of Octaves worked well with lighter elements only.
QUESTIONS1.Did Döbereiner™s triads also exist in the columns of Newlands™ Octaves?
Compare and find out.2.What were the limitations of Döbereiner™s classification?
3.What were the limitations of Newlands™ Law of Octaves?
5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHA5.2 MAKING ORDER OUT OF CHAOS Œ MENDELÉEVOS Œ MENDELÉEVOS Œ MENDELÉEVOS Œ MENDELÉEVOS Œ MENDELÉEV™S™S™S™S™SPERIODIC TABLEPERIODIC TABLEPERIODIC TABLEPERIODIC TABLEPERIODIC TABLEEven after the rejection of Newlands™ Law of Octaves, many scientists
continued to search for a pattern that correlated the properties of elements
with their atomic masses.?Table 5.3 Newlands™ Octaves
Notes of music:sare  gamapadani
(do)(re)(mi)(fa)(so)
(la)(ti)HLiBeBCNO
FNaMgAlSiPS
ClKCaCrTiMnFe
Co and NiCuZnYInAsSe
BrRbSrCe and LaZrŠŠ
Do You Know?Do You Know?Do You Know?Do You Know?Do You Know?
Science82The main credit for classifying elements goes to Dmitri IvanovichMendeléev, a Russian chemist. He was the most important contributor
to the early development of a Periodic Table of elements wherein the

elements were arranged on the basis of their fundamental property, the
atomic mass, and also on the similarity of chemical properties.
Dmitri lvanovich Mendeléev (1834-1907)Dmitri lvanovich Mendeléev was
born in Tobolsk in Western Siberia,
Russia on 8 February 1834. After
his early education, Mendeléev

could join a university only due tothe efforts of his mother. Dedicating
his investigations to his mother hewrote, ﬁShe instructed with
example, corrected with love and

travelled with me to places
spending her last resources and
strength. She knew that with theaid of science without violence, with love but firmness, all
superstitions, untruth and errors can be removed.ﬂ The

arrangement of elements he proposed is called Mendeléev™s
Periodic Table. The Periodic Table proved to be the unifyingprinciple in chemistry. It was the motivation for the discovery of
some new elements.When Mendeléev started his work, 63 elements were known. He
examined the relationship between the atomic masses of the elementsand their physical and chemical properties. Among chemical properties,Mendeléev concentrated on the compounds formed by elements withoxygen and hydrogen. He selected hydrogen and oxygen as they are

very reactive and formed compounds with most elements. The formulaeof the hydrides and oxides formed by an element were treated as one of
the basic properties of an element for its classification. He then took 63
cards and on each card he wrote down the properties of one element. He
sorted out the elements with similar properties and pinned the cards
together on a wall. He observed that most of the elements got a place in
a Periodic Table and were arranged in the order of their increasing atomicmasses. It was also observed that there occurs a periodic recurrence of
elements with similar physical and chemical properties. On this basis,
Mendeléev formulated a Periodic Law, which states that ‚the properties
of elements are the periodic function of their atomic masses™.
Mendeléev™s Periodic Table contains vertical columns called ‚groups™and horizontal rows called ‚periods™ (Table 5.4).

