We share this planet with millions of otherliving beings, starting from micro-organismsand bacteria, lichens to banyan trees,elephants and blue whales. This entirehabitat that we live in has immense
biodiversity. We humans along with all livingorganisms form a complex web of ecological
system in which we are only a part and verymuch dependent on this system for our ownexistence. For example, the plants, animals
and micro-organisms re-create the quality ofthe air we breathe, the water we drink andthe soil that produces our food without whichwe cannot survive. Forests play a key role inthe ecological system as these are also the
primary producers on which all other livingbeings depend.Flora and Fauna in IndiaIf you look around, you will be able to findthat there are some animals and plants which
are unique in your area. In fact, India is one
of the world™s richest countries in terms ofits vast array of biological diversity, and hasnearly 8 per cent of the total number of
species in the world (estimated to be 1.6million). This is possibly twice or thrice thenumber yet to be discovered. You havealready studied in detail about the extentand variety of forest and wildlife resourcesin India. You may have realised theimportance of these resources in our daily
life. These diverse flora and fauna are sowell integrated in our daily life that we takethese for granted. But, lately, they are under
great stress mainy due to insensitivity toour environment.Narak! My Lord, you are the creator of musicin the world of LepchasOh Narak! My Lord, let me dedicatemyself to youLet me gather your music from thesprings, the rivers, the mountains, the forests,
the insects and the animalsLet me gather your music from the sweetbreeze and offer it to youSource: Lepcha folk song from northern part ofWest BengalBiodiversity or Biological Diversity isimmensely rich in wildlife and cultivatedspecies, diverse in form and function butclosely integrated in a system throughmultiple network of interdependencies.Over 81,000 species of fauna and 47,000species of flora are found in this country
so far? Of the estimated 47,000 plantspecies, about 15,000 flowering speciesare endemic (indigenous) to India.Find out stories prevalent in your regionwhich are about the harmonious relationship
between human beings and nature.Some estimates suggest that at least 10per cent of India™s recorded wild flora and20 per cent of its mammals are on thethreatened list. Many of these would now becategorised as ‚critical™, that is on the vergeof extinction like the cheetah, pink-headed
duck, mountain quail, forest spotted owlet,and plants like madhuca insignis (a wild
variety of mahua) and hubbardiaheptaneuron,(a species of grass). In fact, noone can say how many species may havealready been lost. Today, we only talk of thelarger and more visible animals and plantsthat have become extinct but what aboutsmaller animals like insects and plants?Let us now understand the differentcategories of existing plants and animalspecies. Based on the International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN), we can classify asfollowsŒNormal Species: Species whose populationlevels are considered to be normal fortheir survival, such as cattle, sal, pine,
rodents, etc.Endangered Species: These are specieswhich are in danger of extinction. Thesurvival of such species is difficult if the
negative factors that have led to a decline in
their population continue to operate. Theexamples of such species are black buck,crocodile, Indian wild ass, Indian rhino, lion
tailed macaque, sangai (brow anter deer in
Manipur), etc.Vulnerable Species: These are specieswhose population has declined to levels fromwhere it is likely to move into the endangered
category in the near future if the negative
factors continue to operate. The examples of
such species are blue sheep, Asiatic elephant,
Gangetic dolphin, etc.Rare Species: Species with smallpopulation may move into the endangered
or vulnerable category if the negative factors
affecting them continue to operate. The
examples of such species are the Himalayan
brown bear, wild Asiatic buffalo, desert foxand hornbill, etc.Endemic Species: These are species whichare only found in some particular areasusually isolated by natural or geographicalbarriers. Examples of such species are theAndaman teal, Nicobar pigeon, Andaman
wild pig, mithun in Arunchal Pradesh.Extinct Species: These are species whichare not found after searches of known orlikely areas where they may occur. A speciesmay be extinct from a local area, region,
country, continent or the entire earth.
Examples of such species are the Asiatic
cheetah, pink head duck.Do you know that among the larger
animals in India, 79 species of mammals,44 of birds, 15 of reptiles, and 3 ofamphibians are threatened? Nearly 1,500
plant species are considered endangered.Flowering plants and vertebrate animalshave recently become extinct at a rateestimated to be 50 to 100 times theaverage expected natural rate.Vanishing ForestsThe dimensions of deforestation in India arestaggering. The forest and tree cover in thecountry is estimated at 78.92 million hectare,which is 24.01 per cent of the totalgeographical area (dense forest 12.24 percent; open forest 8.99 per cent; and
mangrove 0.14 per cent). According to theState of Forest Report (2013), the dense forestcover has increased by 10,098 sq km since1997. However, this apparent increase in theforest cover is due to plantation by differentagencies.15FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCESFig. 2.1
16CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IIdepleted our forests and wildlife. The greatestdamage inflicted on Indian forests was duringthe colonial period due to the expansion of the
railways, agriculture, commercial and scientificforestry and mining activities. Even afterIndependence, agricultural expansioncontinues to be one of the major causes ofdepletion of forest resources. Between 1951 and
1980, according to the Forest Survey of India,over 26,200 sq. km. of forest area was convertedinto agricultural land all over India. Substantialparts of the tribal belts, especially in the north-eastern and central India, have been deforested
or degraded by shifting cultivation (jhum), a typeof ‚slash and burn™ agriculture.Fig. 2.2:  A few extinct, rare and endangered speciesAsiatic Cheetah: where did they go?The world™s fastest land mammal, thecheetah (Acinonyx jubantus), is a unique andspecialised member of the cat family andcan move at the speed of 112 km./hr. Thecheetah is often mistaken for a leopard. Itsdistinguishing marks are the long teardrop-shaped lines on each side of the nose fromthe corner of its eyes to its mouth. Prior tothe 20th century, cheetahs were widelydistributed throughout Africa and Asia.Today, the Asian cheetah is nearly extinctdue to a decline of available habitat and
prey. The species was declared extinct inIndia long back in 1952.What are the negative factors that cause suchfearful depletion of the flora and fauna?If you look around, you will be able to findout how we have transformed nature into aresource obtaining directly and indirectly fromthe forests and wildlife Œ wood, barks, leaves,
rubber, medicines, dyes, food, fuel, fodder,manure, etc. So it is we ourselves who haveAre colonial forest policiesto be blamed?Some of our environmental activists say that
the promotion of a few favoured species, inmany parts of India, has been carriedthrough the ironically-termed ﬁenrichment
plantationﬂ, in which a single commerciallyvaluable species was extensively planted
and other species eliminated. For instance,
