Popular Struggles and Movements
57Chapter 5Popular
Struggles and
Movements
OverviewIn the earlier chapters we discussed why power sharing is importantin a democracy and how different tiers of government and various
social groups share power. In this chapter we will carry this discussion
further and see how those who exercise power are constrained by theinfluence and pressure exerted on them. Democracy almost invariably
involves conflict of interests and viewpoints. These differences are
often expressed in organised ways. Those who are in power are required
to balance these conflicting demands and pressures.  We begin thischapter with a discussion of how struggles around conflicting demands
and pressures shape democracy. This leads to an analysis of the

different ways and organisations through which ordinary citizen can
play a role in democracy. In this chapter, we look at the indirect ways

of influencing politics, through pressure groups and movements.
This leads us in the next chapter to the direct ways of controllingpolitical power in the form of political parties.
58Democratic Politics
Popular struggles in Nepal and Bolivia
Do you remember the story of thetriumph of democracy in Poland? We

studied it last year in the first chapter
of class IX. The story reminded us
about the role played by the peoplein the making of democracy. Let us

read two recent stories of that kind
and see how power is exercised in
democracy.
Movement for democracy inNepalNepal witnessed an extraordinarypopular movement in April 2006. The
movement was aimed at restoring
democracy. Nepal, you might recall, was

one of the ‚third wave™ countries that hadwon democracy in 1990. Although theking formally remained the head of the
state, the real power was exercised by
popularly elected representatives. King
Birendra, who has accepted this transitionfrom absolute monarchy to constitutionalmonarchy, was killed in a mysterious
massacre of the royal family in 2001.King Gyanendra, the new king of Nepal,was not prepared to accept democraticrule. He took advantage of the weaknessand unpopularity of the democraticallyelected government. In February 2005,
the king dismissed the then Prime Ministerand dissolved the popularly electedParliament. The movement of April2006 was aimed at regaining popularcontrol over the government from

the king.

Popular Struggles and Movements
59All the major political parties in the
parliament formed a Seven Party
Alliance (SPA) and called for a four-day

strike in Kathmandu, the country™s capital.
This protest soon turned into anindefinite strike in which MAOISTinsurgents and various otherorganisations joined hands. People defied
curfew and took to the streets. The

security forces found themselves unableto take on more than a lakh people whogathered almost every day to demand
restoration of democracy. The number
of protesters reached between three andfive lakhs on 21 April and they served

an ultimatum to the king. The leaders

of the movement rejected the half-
hearted concessions made by the king.

They stuck to their demands forMaoists: Thosecommunists who believein the ideology of Mao, the
leader of the ChineseRevolution. They seek to
overthrow the government
through an armed
revolution so as toestablish the rule of the
peasants and workers.restoration of parliament, power toan all-party government and a new
constituent assembly.
On 24 April 2006, the last day ofthe ultimatum, the king was forced toconcede all the three demands. The SPA

chose Girija Prasad Koirala as the new
Prime Minister of the interim
government. The restored parliament
met and passed laws taking away most
of the powers of the king. The SPA and

the Maoists came to an understanding
about how the new Constituent
Assembly was going to be elected. Thisstruggle came to be known as Nepal™s

second movement for democracy.  The

struggle of the Nepali people is a source

of inspiration to democrats all over
the world.Political parties and people of Nepal in a rally demanding restoration of democracy in their country© Min Bajarachya
60Democratic Politics
Bolivia™s Water War
The story of Poland and that of Nepal
apply to the struggle for establishing or

restoring democracy. But the role of
popular struggles does not come to an
end with the establishment of democracy.

People™s successful struggle against
privatisation of water in Bolivia remindsus that popular struggles are integral to

the working of democracy.
Bolivia is a poor country in LatinAmerica. The World Bank pressurised the

government to give up its control ofmunicipal water supply. The government
sold these rights for the city of
Cochabamba to a multi-nationalcompany (MNC). The companyimmediately increased the price of water
by four times. Many people received
monthly water bill of Rs 1000 in acountry where average income is around
Rs 5000 a month. This led to aspontaneous popular protest.In January 2000, a new alliance oflabour, human rights and community
leaders organised a successful four-daygeneral strike in the city. The government

agreed to negotiate and the strike wascalled off. Yet nothing happened. The
police resorted to brutal repression when
the agitation was started again in February.
Another strike followed in April and thegovernment imposed martial law. But the

power of the people forced the officialsof the MNC to flee the city and madethe government concede to all the
demands of the protesters. The contract
with the MNC was cancelled and watersupply was restored to the municipality
at old rates. This came to be known as
Bolivia™s water war.
Democracy and popularstruggles
These two stories are from very differentcontexts. The movement in Nepal was
to establish democracy, while the struggle
in Bolivia involved claims on an elected,democratic government. The popularstruggle in Bolivia was about one specific

policy, while the  struggle in Nepal was

about the foundations of the country™s
politics. Both these struggles were
successful but their impact was at
different levels.
Despite these differences, both thestories share some elements which arerelevant to the study of the past andfuture of democracies. Both these are
instances of political conflict that led topopular struggles. In both cases the

struggle involved mass mobilisation.

Public demonstration of mass support
clinched the dispute. Finally, both
instances involved critical role of politicalorganisations. If you recall the first
chapter of Class IX textbook, this is how
democracy has evolved all over the
world.  We can, therefore, draw a few

conclusions from these examples:Democracy evolves throughpopular struggles
. It is possible that some
significant decisions may take placethrough consensus and may not involve
any conflict at all. But that would be an
exception. Defining moments ofdemocracy usually involve conflictbetween those groups who have
exercised power and those who aspire
for a share in power. These moments

come when the country is going through
transition to democracy, expansion of
democracy or deepening of democracy.
Democratic conflict is resolvedthrough mass mobilisation. SometimesAre yousuggesting that
strike, dharna,bandh anddemonstration
are good fordemocracy?
Popular Struggles and Movements
61Does it mean thatwhichever side
manages tomobilise a biggercrowd gets away
with whatever itwants? Are wesaying that ‚Might
is Right™ in ademocracy?it is possible that the conflict is resolvedby using the existing institutions like theparliament or the judiciary. But when
there is a deep dispute, very often these
institutions themselves get involved in the
dispute. The resolution has to come
from outside, from the people.These conflicts and mobilisations arebased on new political organisations.
True, there is an element of spontaneity
in all such historic moments. But the
spontaneous public participationbecomes effective with the help oforganised politics. There can be many
agencies of organised politics. These
include political parties, pressure groupsand movement groups.
In 1984, the Karnataka government set up a company called Karnataka PulpwoodLimited. About 30,000 hectares of land was given virtually free to this company for 40years. Much of this land was used by local farmers as grazing land for their cattle.However the company began to plant eucalyptus trees on this land, which could be used
for making paper pulp. In 1987, a movement called Kittiko-Hachchiko (meaning, pluck andplant) started a non-violent protest, where people plucked the eucalyptus plants and
planted saplings of trees that were useful to the people.Suppose you belong to any of the following groups, what arguments would you putforward to defend your side: a local farmer, an environmental activist, a government

official working in this company or just a consumer of paper.
Mobilisation and organisationsLet us go back to our two examples andlook at the organisations that made thesestruggles successful. We noted that the
call for indefinite strike was given by the
SPA or the Seven Party Alliance in Nepal.
This alliance included some big partiesthat had some members in theParliament. But the SPA was not the only
organisation behind this mass upsurge.The protest was joined by the Nepalese
Communist Party (Maoist) which did notbelieve in parliamentary democracy. This
party was involved in an armed struggle
against the Nepali government and hadestablished its control over large parts
of Nepal.The struggle involved many
organisations other than political parties.

All the major labour unions and theirfederations joined this movement. Manyother organisations like the organisation
of the indigenous people, teachers,lawyers and human rights groups
extended support to the movement.
62Democratic Politics
I don™t like thisword‚mobilisation™.
Makes it feel as ifpeople are likesheep.The protest against waterprivatisation in 
Bolivia was not led byany political party. It was led by an
organisation called FEDECOR. This
organisation comprised localprofessionals, including engineers and
environmentalists. They were supported

by a federation of farmers who relied

on irrigation, the confederation of
factory workers™ unions,  middle class
students from the the University of
Cochabamba and the city™s growing

population of homeless street children.
The movement was supported by theSocialist Party.   In 2006, this party came

to power in Bolivia.From both these examples, we can
see that in a democracy several different
kinds of organisations work behind any
big struggle. These organisations play
their role in two ways. One obvious way
of influencing the decisions in a
democracy is direct participation in
competitive politics. This is done by

creating parties, contesting elections andforming governments. But every citizen

does not participate so directly. They

may not have the desire, the need or
the skills to take part in direct political
activity other than voting.
There are many indirect ways inwhich people can get governments to
listen to their demands or their pointsof view. They could do so by forming

an organisation and undertaking activities
to promote their interests or their
viewpoints. These are called interest

groups or pressure groups. Sometimes

people decide to act together without
forming organisations.
Governments initiate schemes and programmes to alleviate the suffering of the poorand meet their basic needs. But poverty remains in the country. What could be the

reasons for such a situation?© Keshav - The Hindu
Popular Struggles and Movements
63Pressure groups and movementsPressure groups are organisations that
attempt to influence governmentpolicies. But unlike political parties,
pressure groups do not aim to directlycontrol or share political power. These
organisations are formed when people
with common occupation, interest,aspirations or opinions come togetherin order to achieve a common objective.In the course of the discussionabove we came across entities that arenot quite an organisation. The struggle
in Nepal was called a movement fordemocracy. We often hear the word
people™s movement to describe many
forms of collective action: Narmada

Bachao Andolan, Movement for Right
to Information, Anti-liquor Movement,

Women™s Movement, Environmental
Movement. Like an interest group, a

movement also attempts to influence
politics rather than directly take part in
electoral competition. But unlike the
interest groups, movements have a
loose organisation. Their decision
making is more informal and flexible.

They depend much more on
spontaneous mass participation than aninterest group.
Can you identify thepressure groups
functioning in the newsclippings given here?What demand are they
making?
64Democratic Politics
Sectional interest groups andpublic interest groupsUsually interest groups seek to promotethe interests of a particular section or
group of society. Trade unions, business

associations and professional (lawyers,
doctors, teachers, etc.) bodies are someexamples of this type. They are sectional
because they represent a section of
society: workers, employees, business-
persons, industrialists, followers of a
religion, caste group, etc. Their principal

concern is the betterment and well-being

of their members, not society in general.Sometimes these organisations arenot about representing the interest of onesection of society. They represent some

common or general interest that needs
to be defended. The members of the
organisation may not benefit from the
cause that the organisation represents. The

Bolivian organisation, FEDECOR is an
example of that kind of an organisation.
In the context of Nepal, we noted the
participation of human rights
organisations. We read about these

organisations in Class IX.These second type of groups arecalled promotional groups or publicinterest groups. They promote collective

rather than selective good. They aim to
help groups other than their own
members. For example, a group fighting

against bonded labour fights not for itself
but for those who are suffering under
such bondage. In some instances the
members of a public interest group may
undertake activity that benefits them as
well as others too. For example,

BAMCEF (Backward and Minority
Communities Employees Federation) is

an organisation largely made up of
government employees that campaigns
against caste discrimination. It addressesLand rights protest: farmers of West Java, Indonesia. In June 2004,
about 15,000 landless farmers from West Java, travelled to Jakarta,
the capital city. They came with their families to demand land reform, to
insist on the return of their farms. Demonstrators chanted, ﬁNo land, Novoteﬂ declaring that they would boycott Indonesia™s first directpresidential election if no candidate backed land reform.© wikipedia.com
