77The  Making  of  a  Global  World
1  The Pre-modern World
When we talk of ‚globalisation™ we often refer to an economicsystem that has emerged since the last 50 years or so. But as you will
see in this chapter, the making of the global world has a longhistory Œ of trade, of migration, of people in search of work, the
movement of capital, and much else. As we think about the dramaticand visible signs of global interconnectedness in our lives today,
we need to understand the phases through which this world in
which we live has emerged.All through history, human societies have become steadily more
interlinked. From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and
pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity andspiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution. They carried goods,money, values, skills, ideas, inventions, and even germs and diseases.

As early as 3000 
BCE an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley
civilisations with present-day West Asia. For more than a millennia,
cowries (the Hindi c
owdi 
or seashells, used as a form of currency)
from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa. Thelong-distance spread of disease-carrying germs may be traced as
far back as the seventh century. By the thirteenth century it had

become an unmistakable link.The Making of a Global World
Chapter IVThe Making of a Global World
Fig. 1 Œ Image of a ship on a memorial stone,Goa Museum, tenth century CE.From the ninth century, images of ships
appear regularly in memorial stones found in
the western coast, indicating the significance

of oceanic trade.
India and the Contemporary World781.1 Silk Routes Link the WorldThe silk routes are a good example of vibrant pre-modern tradeand cultural links between distant parts of the world. The name ‚silk
routes™ points to the importance of West-bound Chinese silk cargoes
along this route. Historians have identified several silk routes, overland and by sea, knitting together vast regions of Asia, and linking
Asia with Europe and northern Africa. They are known to have
existed since before the Christian Era and thrived almost till the
fifteenth century. But Chinese pottery also travelled the same route,

as did textiles and spices from India and Southeast Asia. In return,
precious metals Œ gold and silver Œ flowed from Europe to Asia.Trade and cultural exchange always went hand in hand. Early
Christian missionaries almost certainly travelled this route to Asia, as
did early Muslim preachers a few centuries later. Much before all

this, Buddhism emerged from eastern India and spread in several
directions through intersecting points on the silk routes.
1.2 Food Travels: Spaghetti and Potato
Food offers many examples of long-distance cultural exchange.

Traders and travellers introduced new crops to the lands they

travelled. Even ‚ready™ foodstuff  in distant parts of the world might

share common origins. Take spaghetti and noodles. It is believed

that noodles travelled west from China to
become spaghetti. Or, perhaps Arab traders
took pasta to fifth-century Sicily, an island now

in Italy. Similar foods were also known in India

and Japan, so the truth about their origins may
never be known. Yet such guesswork suggests

the possibilities of long-distance cultural contacteven in the pre-modern world.Many of our common foods such as potatoes,soya, groundnuts, maize, tomatoes, chillies,

sweet potatoes, and so on were not known to
our ancestors until about five centuries ago.

These foods were only introduced in Europe
and Asia after Christopher Columbus
accidentally discovered the vast continent that
would later become known as the Americas.
Fig. 3 Œ Merchants from Venice and the Orient exchanging goods,from Marco Polo, Book of Marvels, fifteenth century.Fig. 2 Œ Silk route trade as depicted in aChinese cave painting, eighth century, Cave
217, Mogao Grottoes, Gansu, China.
79The  Making  of  a  Global  World
(Here we will use ‚America™ to describe North America, South
America and the Caribbean.) In fact, many of our common foodscame from America™s original inhabitants Œ the American Indians.
Sometimes the new crops could make the difference between lifeand death. Europe™s poor began to eat better and live longer with

the introduction of the humble potato. Ireland™s poorest peasants
became so dependent on potatoes that when disease destroyed thepotato crop in the mid-1840s, hundreds of thousands diedof starvation.
1.3 Conquest, Disease and TradeThe pre-modern world shrank greatly in the sixteenth century afterEuropean sailors found a sea route to Asia and also successfully
crossed the western ocean to America. For centuries before, the
Indian Ocean had known a bustling trade, with goods, people,knowledge, customs, etc. criss-crossing its waters. The Indian
subcontinent was central to these flows and a crucial point in theirnetworks.  The entry of the Europeans helped expand or redirect

some of these flows towards Europe.Before its ‚discovery™, America had been cut off from regular contactwith the rest of the world for millions of years. But from the sixteenth
century, its vast lands and abundant crops and minerals began to
transform trade and lives everywhere.
Precious metals, particularly silver, from mines located in present-day Peru and Mexico also enhanced Europe™s wealth and financed

its trade with Asia. Legends spread in seventeenth-century Europeabout South America™s fabled wealth. Many expeditions set off in
search of El Dorado, the fabled city of gold.
The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of America
was decisively under way by the mid-sixteenth century.  European

conquest was not just a result of superior firepower. In fact, the
most powerful weapon of the Spanish conquerors was not aconventional military weapon at all. It was the germs such as those
of smallpox that they carried on their person. Because of their longisolation, America™s original inhabitants had no immunity against
these diseases that came from Europe. Smallpox in particular proveda deadly killer. Once introduced, 
it spread deep into the continent,ahead even of any Europeans reaching there. It killed and decimatedwhole communities, paving the way for conquest.Fig. 4 Œ  The Irish Potato Famine,
 Illustrated
London News, 1849.Hungry children digging for potatoes in a field that
has already been harvested, hoping to discover
some leftovers. During the Great Irish Potato
Famine (1845 to 1849), around 1,000,000

people died of starvation in Ireland, and double the

number emigrated in search of work.‚Biological™ warfare?John Winthorp, the first governor of  the
Massachusetts Bay colony in New England,
wrote in May 1634 that smallpox signalled God™s
blessing for the colonists: ‚– the natives – were
neere (near) all dead of small Poxe (pox), so as
the Lord hathe (had) cleared our title to what
we possess™.
Alfred Crosby, 
Ecological Imperialism
.Box 1
India and the Contemporary World80Explain what we mean when we say that theworld ‚shrank™ in the 1500s.DiscussGuns could be bought or captured and turned against the invaders.
But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were
mostly immune.Until the nineteenth century, poverty and hunger were common in
Europe. Cities were crowded and deadly diseases were widespread.
Religious conflicts were common, and religious dissenters were
persecuted. Thousands therefore fled Europe for America. Here,
by the eighteenth century, plantations worked by slaves captured
in Africa were growing cotton and sugar for European markets.
Until well into the eighteenth century, China and India were among
the world™s richest countries. They were also pre-eminent in Asian
trade. However, from the fifteenth century, China is said to have
restricted overseas contacts and retreated into isolation.  China™s

reduced role and the rising importance of the Americas graduallymoved the centre of world trade westwards. Europe now emerged
as the centre of  world trade.
New wordsDissenter Œ One who refuses to acceptestablished beliefs and practicesFig. 5 Œ Slaves for sale, New Orleans, Illustrated London News
, 1851.A prospective buyer carefully inspecting slaves lined up before the auction. You can see two
children along with four women and seven men in top hats and suit waiting to be sold. To attract
buyers, slaves were often dressed in their best clothes.
81The  Making  of  a  Global  World
The world changed profoundly in the nineteenth century. Economic,
political, social, cultural and technological factors interacted incomplex ways to transform societies and reshape external relations.
Economists identify three types of movement or ‚flows™ withininternational economic exchanges. The first is the flow of trade which
in the nineteenth century referred largely to trade in goods (e.g.,
cloth or wheat). The second is the flow of labour Œ the migration
of people in search of employment. The third is the movement ofcapital for short-term or long-term investments over long distances.
All three flows were closely interwoven and affected peoples™ livesmore deeply now than ever before. The interconnections couldsometimes be broken Œ for example, labour migration was oftenmore restricted than goods or capital flows. Yet it helps us understand

the nineteenth-century world economy better if we look at thethree flows together.
2.1 A World Economy Takes ShapeA good place to start is the changing pattern of food production
and consumption in industrial Europe. Traditionally, countries liked
to be self-sufficient in food. But in nineteenth-century Britain,
self-sufficiency in food meant lower living standards and socialconflict. Why was this so?Population growth from the late eighteenth century had increased
the demand for food grains in Britain. As urban centres expandedand industry grew, the demand for agricultural products went
up, pushing up food grain prices. Under pressure from landed

groups, the government also restricted the import of corn. Thelaws allowing the government to do this were commonly known asthe ‚Corn Laws™. Unhappy with high food prices, industrialists and
urban dwellers forced the abolition of the Corn Laws.
After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported intoBritain more cheaply than it could be produced within the country.

British agriculture was unable to compete with imports.  Vast areas
of land were now left uncultivated, and thousands of men andwomen were thrown out of work. They flocked to the cities or
migrated overseas.
2  The Nineteenth Century (1815-1914)

India and the Contemporary World82As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose. From the mid-nineteenth century, faster industrial growth in Britain also led to higher

incomes, and therefore more food imports. Around the world Œ in
Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia  Œ  lands were cleared
and food production expanded to meet the British demand.It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture. Railways
were needed to link the agricultural regions to the ports. New
harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the new
cargoes. People had to settle on the lands to bring them under
cultivation. This meant building homes and settlements. All these
activities in turn required capital and labour. Capital flowed from

financial centres such as London. The demand for labour in placeswhere labour was in short supply Œ as in America and Australia Œled to more migration.
Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America andAustralia in the nineteenth century. All over the world some 150
million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and
vast distances over land in search of a better future.Fig. 6 Œ Emigrant ship leaving for the US, byM.W. Ridley, 1869.Fig. 7 Œ Irish emigrants waiting to board the ship, by  Michael Fitzgerald, 1874.
83The  Making  of  a  Global  World
Prepare a flow chart to show how Britain™sdecision to import food led to increasedmigration to America and Australia.
ActivityThus by 1890, a global agricultural economy had taken shape,accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns,
capital flows, ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from
a nearby village or town, but from thousands of miles away. It was
not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural
worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a largefarm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest. It was
transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships

which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paidworkers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean.Imagine that you are an agricultural worker who has arrived inAmerica from Ireland. Write a paragraph on why you chose tocome and how you are earning your living.ActivitySome of this dramatic change, though on a smaller scale, occurredcloser home in west Punjab. Here the British Indian government

built a network of irrigation canals to transform semi-desert wastes

into fertile agricultural lands that could grow wheat and cotton forexport. The Canal Colonies, as the areas irrigated by the new canalswere called, were settled by peasants from other parts of Punjab.
Of course, food is merely an example. A similar story can be toldfor cotton, the cultivation of which expanded worldwide to feedBritish textile mills. Or rubber. Indeed, so rapidly did regional
specialisation in the production of commodities develop, that

between 1820 and 1914 world trade is estimated to have multiplied
25 to 40 times. Nearly 60 per cent of this trade comprised ‚primary
products™ Œ that is, agricultural products such as wheat and cotton,and minerals such as coal.2.2 Role of TechnologyWhat was the role of technology in all this? The railways, steamships,
the telegraph, for example, were important inventions withoutwhich we cannot imagine the transformed nineteenth-century world.

But technological advances were often the result of larger social,
political and economic factors. For example, colonisation stimulated
new investments and improvements in transport: faster railways,lighter wagons and larger ships helped move food more cheaply
and quickly from faraway farms to final markets.

India and the Contemporary World84The trade in meat offers a good example of this connected process.
Till the 1870s, animals were shipped live from America to Europe
and then slaughtered when they arrived there. But live animals tookup a lot of ship space. Many also died in voyage, fell ill, lost weight,or became unfit to eat. Meat was hence an expensive luxury beyond
the reach of the European poor. High prices in turn kept demand
and production down until the development of a new technology,
namely, refrigerated ships, which enabled the transport of perishable

foods over long distances.
Now animals were slaughtered for food at the starting point Œ inAmerica, Australia or New Zealand Œ and then transported to
Europe as frozen meat. This reduced shipping costs and loweredmeat prices in Europe. The poor in Europe could now consumea more varied diet. To the earlier monotony of bread and potatoes
many, though not all, could now add meat (and butter and eggs)to their diet. Better living conditions promoted social peace withinthe country and support for imperialism abroad.2.3 Late nineteenth-century ColonialismTrade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth
century. But this was not only a period of expanding trade and
increased prosperity. It is important to realise that there was adarker side to this process.  In many parts of the world, the
expansion of trade and a closer relationship with the world
economy also meant a loss of freedoms and livelihoods. Late-nineteenth-century European conquests produced many painfuleconomic, social and ecological changes through which the
colonised societies were brought into the world economy.Fig. 8 Š The Smithfield ClubCattle Show, Illustrated LondonNews, 
1851.Cattle were traded at fairs, brought

by farmers for sale. One of the
oldest livestock markets in London
was at Smithfield. In the mid-
nineteenth century a huge poultry
and meat market was established
near the railway line connecting
Smithfield to all the meat-supplying

centres of the country.Fig. 9 Œ Meat being loaded on to the ship,
Alexandra, Illustrated London News, 1878.Export of meat was possible only after ships
were refrigerated.
85The  Making  of  a  Global  World
Look at a map of Africa (Fig. 10). Youwill see some countries™ borders run
straight, as if they were drawn using aruler. Well, in fact this was almost howrival European powers in Africa drew up
the borders demarcating their respectiveterritories. In 1885 the big Europeanpowers met in Berlin to complete the
carving up of Africa between them.Britain and France made vast additions totheir overseas territories in the late nineteenth
century. Belgium and Germany became new
colonial powers. The US also became a
colonial power in the late 1890s by taking
over some colonies earlier held by Spain.Let us look at one example of the destructiveimpact of colonialism on the economy and
livelihoods of colonised people.Sir Henry Morton Stanley in CentralAfricaStanley was a journalist and explorer sentby the 
New York Herald
 to find Livingston,
a missionary and explorer who had been in
Africa for several years. Like other European
and American explorers of the time, Stanley
went with arms, mobilised local hunters,

warriors and labourers to help him, fought
with local tribes, investigated African
terrains, and mapped different regions.
These explorations helped the conquest
of Africa. Geographical explorations were
not driven by an innocent search for
scientific information. They were directly
linked to imperial projects.Box 2Fig. 10 Œ Map of colonial Africa at the end of the nineteenth century.Fig. 11 Œ Sir Henry Morton Stanley and his retinue in Central Africa,Illustrated London News, 1871.MOROCCOALGERIASPANISH
SAHARARIODE OROPORTGUINEAFRENCH SUDANFRENCH WEST AFRICANIGERIATOGOCAMEROONSMIDDLECONGOCONGOFREE STATE
(BELGIANCONGO)ANGOLAGERMANSOUTH WESTAFRICAUNION OFSOUTH AFRICANORTHERNRHODESIASOUTHERNRHODESIAPORTUGUESEEAST AFRICAMADAGASCARGERMANEAST AFRICABRITISHEAST AFRICABRITISHSOMALILANDETHIOPIAITALIAN
SOMALILANDFRENCHSOMALILANDERITREAANGLO-EGYPTIANSUDANEGYPTLIBYA
(TRIPOLI)TUNISIAMEDITERRANEAN SEAFRENCHEQUATORIAL
AFRICASPANISH
MOROCCORED SEAATLANTIC
OCEANBELGIANBRITISHFRENCHGERMANITALIAN

PORTUGUESESPANISH
BRITISH DOMINION
INDEPENDENT STATE
GOLDCOASTIVORYCOASTSIERRALEONE
India and the Contemporary World862.4 Rinderpest, or the Cattle PlagueIn Africa, in the 1890s, a fast-spreading disease of cattle plagueor rinderpest had a terrifying impact on people™s livelihoods
and the local economy. This is a good example of the
widespread European imperial impact on colonised societies.

It shows how in this era of conquest even a disease affectingcattle reshaped the lives and fortunes of thousands of people
and their relations with the rest of the world.Historically, Africa had abundant land and a relatively small
population. For centuries, land and livestock sustained African
livelihoods and people rarely worked for a wage. In late-
nineteenth-century Africa there were few consumer goods thatwages could buy. If you had been an African possessing land
and livestock Œ and there was plenty of both Œ you too would
have seen little reason to work for a wage.In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to
Africa due to its vast resources of land and minerals. Europeans

came to Africa hoping to establish plantations and mines toproduce crops and minerals for export to Europe. But therewas an unexpected problem Œ a shortage of labour willing to
work for wages.
Employers used many methods to recruit and retain labour. Heavy

taxes were imposed which could be paid only by working for wageson plantations and mines. Inheritance laws were changed so that
Fig. 12 Œ Transport to the Transvaal gold mines,The Graphic, 1887.Crossing the Wilge river was the quickest method of
transport to the gold fields of Transvaal. After the
discovery of gold in Witwatersrand, Europeans
rushed to the region despite their fear of disease and
death, and the difficulties of the journey. By the
1890s, South Africa contributed over 20 per cent of
the world gold production.Fig. 13 Š Diggers at workin the Transvaal gold fields
in South Africa, TheGraphic, 1875.

87The  Making  of  a  Global  World
peasants were displaced from land:  only one member of a family
was allowed to inherit land, as a result of which the others were
pushed into the labour market. Mineworkers were also confined incompounds and not allowed to move about freely.
Then came rinderpest, a devastating cattle disease.
Rinderpest arrived in Africa in the late 1880s.  It was carried by
infected cattle imported from British Asia to feed the Italian soldiersinvading Eritrea in East Africa. Entering Africa in the east, rinderpest
moved west ‚like forest fire™, reaching Africa™s Atlantic coast in 1892.
It reached the Cape (Africa™s southernmost tip) five years later. Along
the way rinderpest killed 90 per cent of the cattle.The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods. Planters, mine owners
and colonial governments now successfully monopolised what scarcecattle resources remained, to strengthen their power and to force
Africans into the labour market. Control over the scarce resourceof cattle enabled European colonisers to conquer and subdue Africa.Similar stories can be told about the impact of Western conquest on
other parts of the nineteenth-century world.2.4 Indentured Labour Migration from IndiaThe example of indentured labour migration from India also
illustrates the two-sided nature of the nineteenth-century world.It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery,
higher incomes for some and poverty for others, technological
advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others.
In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and
Chinese labourers went to work on plantations, in mines, and in
road and railway construction projects around the world. In India,indentured labourers were hired under contracts which promisedreturn travel to India after they had worked five years on their
employer™s plantation.
Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regionsof eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts
of Tamil Nadu. In the mid-nineteenth century these regions
experienced many changes Œ cottage industries declined, land rentsrose, lands were cleared for mines and plantations. All this affected

the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents, became deeplyindebted and were forced to migrate in search of work.New wordsIndentured labour Œ A  bonded labourer under
contract to work for an employer for a specificamount of time, to pay off his passage to a
new country or home
India and the Contemporary World88Discuss the importance of language andpopular traditions in the creation of nationalidentity.
The main destinations of Indian indenturedmigrants were the Caribbean islands (mainlyTrinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji.
Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and

Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited
for tea plantations in Assam.Recruitment was done by agents engaged byemployers and paid a small commission. Manymigrants agreed to take up work hoping to escapepoverty or oppression in their home villages.

Agents also tempted the prospective migrants
by providing false information about final

destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the
work, and living and working conditions. Often
migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a longsea voyage. Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less
willing migrants.
Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a ‚new systemof slavery™. On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions
to be different from what they had imagined. Living and workingconditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights.
But workers discovered their own ways of surviving. Many of them
escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment.
Others developed new forms of individual and collective self-

expression, blending different cultural forms, old and new. In

Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a
riotous carnival called ‚Hosay™ (for Imam Hussain) in which workersof all races and religions joined. Similarly, the protest religion of

Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star Bob

Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian
migrants to the Caribbean. ‚Chutney music™, popular in Trinidad

and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the
post-indenture experience. These forms of cultural fusion are part
of the making of the global world, where things from different
places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become
something entirely new.
Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, orreturned to their new homes after a short spell in India. Consequently,
there are large communities of people of Indian descent in thesecountries. Have you heard of the Nobel Prize-winning writer
Fig. 14 Š Indian indentured labourers in a cocoa plantation inTrinidad, early nineteenth century.DiscussFig. 15 Š Indentured laboureres photographedfor identification.
For the employers, the numbers and not the
names mattered.
89The  Making  of  a  Global  World
V.S. Naipaul? Some of you may have followed the exploits of West
Indies cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh Sarwan.If you have wondered why their names sound vaguely Indian, theanswer is that they are descended from indentured labour migrantsfrom India.From the 1900s India™s nationalist leaders began opposing the system
of indentured labour migration as abusive and cruel. It was abolishedin 1921. Yet for a number of decades afterwards, descendants of
Indian indentured workers, often thought of as ‚coolies™, remainedan uneasy minority in the Caribbean islands. Some of Naipaul™s
early novels capture their sense of loss and alienation.2.5 Indian Entrepreneurs AbroadGrowing food and other crops for the world market required
capital. Large plantations could borrow it from banks and markets.
But what about the humble peasant?Enter the Indian banker. Do you know of the Shikaripuri shroffs
and Nattukottai  Chettiars? They were amongst the many groups
of bankers and traders who financed export agriculture in Central
and Southeast Asia, using either their own funds or those borrowedfrom European banks. They had a sophisticated system to transfer
money over large distances, and even developed indigenous forms
of corporate organisation.Indian traders and moneylenders also followed European colonisersinto Africa. Hyderabadi Sindhi traders, however, ventured beyondEuropean colonies. From the 1860s they established flourishing

emporia at busy ports worldwide, selling local and imported curiosto tourists whose numbers were beginning to swell, thanks to thedevelopment of safe and comfortable passenger vessels.
2.6 Indian Trade, Colonialism and the Global SystemHistorically, fine cottons produced in 
India were exported  to Europe.
With industrialisation, British cotton manufacture began to expand,and industrialists pressurised the government to restrict cottonimports and protect local industries. Tariffs were imposed on cloth
imports into Britain. Consequently, the inflow of fine Indian cotton
began to decline.From the early nineteenth century, 
British manufacturers also began
to seek overseas markets for their cloth. Excluded from the BritishFig. 16 Š A contract form of an indentured
labourer.The testimony of  an indentured labourer
Extract from the testimony of Ram NarainTewary, an indentured labourer who spent ten

years on Demerara in the early twentieth century.
‚– in spite of my best efforts, I could not properly
do the works that were allotted to me ... In a
few days I got my hands bruised all over and I
could not go to work for a week for which I was

prosecuted and sent to jail for 14 days. ... new
emigrants find the tasks allotted to them
extremely heavy and cannot complete them in
a day. ... Deductions are also made from wages

if the work is considered to have been done

unsatisfactorily. Many people cannot therefore

earn their full wages and are punished in various
ways. In fact, the labourers have to spend their
period of indenture in great trouble –™
Source: Department of Commerce and Industry,
Emigration Branch. 1916SourceSource A
India and the Contemporary World90market by tariff barriers, Indian textiles now faced stiff competitionin other international markets. If we look at the figures of exports
from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles:from some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815. By the1870s this proportion had dropped to below 3 per cent.What, then, did India export? The figures again tell a dramaticstory.  While exports of manufactures declined rapidly, export of
raw materials increased equally fast. Between 1812 and 1871, theshare of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent.
Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export forFig. 17 Œ East India Company House, London.This was the nerve centre of the worldwide operations of the East India Company.Fig. 18 Œ A distant view of Surat

and its river.
All through the seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries, Surat remained

the main centre of overseas trade in
the western Indian Ocean.

91The  Making  of  a  Global  World
Fig. 19 Œ The trade routes that linked India to the world at the end of the seventeenth century.many decades. And, as you have read last year, opium shipments to
China grew rapidly from the 1820s to become for a while India™s

single largest export. Britain grew opium in India and exported it toChina and, with the money earned through this sale, it financed its
tea and other imports from China.Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian
market. Food grain and raw 
material exports from India to Britain
and the rest of the world increased. But the value of British exports
to India was much higher than the value of British imports fromIndia. Thus Britain had a ‚trade surplus™ with India. Britain used thissurplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries Œ that is,
with countries from which Britain was importing more than it wasselling to. This is how a multilateral settlement system works Œ
it allows one country™s deficit with another country to be settled

by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain balance its
deficits,  India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century
world economy.
Britain™s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‚home
charges™ that included private remittances home by British officialsand traders, interest payments on 
India™s external debt, and pensions
of British officials in India.SuratGoaMadrasMasulipatamHooglyBangkokHanoiCantonMalaccaBataviaBantamAchehMuscatBandar AbbasBasraAleppoAlexandriaJeddaMachaLahoreBukharaYarkand
TheGreatWallMombasaMozambiqueSea routeLand routeVolume of trade passing through the portRed SeaPersian GulfIndian Ocean
India and the Contemporary World923  The Inter-war Economy
The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought in Europe. But
its impact was felt around the world. Notably for our concerns
in this chapter, it plunged the first half of the twentieth century
into a crisis that took over three decades to overcome. During
this period the world experienced widespread economic and
political instability, and another catastrophic war.
3.1 Wartime TransformationsThe First World War, as you know, was fought between two power

blocs. On the one side were the Allies Œ Britain, France and Russia

(later joined by the US); and on the opposite side were the Central
Powers Œ Germany, Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey.  When

the war began in August 1914, many governments thought it would
be over by Christmas. It lasted more than four years.
The First World War was a war like no other before. The fighting
involved the world™s leading industrial nations which now

harnessed the vast powers of modern industry to inflict the greatest
possible destruction on their enemies.
This war was thus the first modern industrial war. It saw the use
of machine guns, tanks, aircraft, chemical weapons, etc. on a
massive scale. These were all increasingly products of modern large-
scale industry. To fight the war, millions of soldiers

had to be recruited from around the world and
moved to the frontlines on large ships and trains.
The scale of death and destruction Œ 9 million dead
and 20 million injured Œ was unthinkable before the
industrial age, without the use of industrial arms.
Most of the killed and maimed were men ofworking age. These deaths and injuries reduced the

able-bodied workforce in Europe. With fewer
numbers within the family, household incomes

declined after the war.
During the war, industries were restructured toproduce war-related goods. Entire societies were

also reorganised for war Œ as men went to battle,
women stepped in to undertake jobs that earlier onlymen were expected to do.
Fig. 20 Œ Workers in a munition factory during the First WorldWar.
Production  of armaments increased rapidly to meet war demands.

93The  Making  of  a  Global  World
The war led to the snapping of economic links between some ofthe world™s largest economic powers which were now fighting

each other to pay for them. So Britain borrowed large sums
of money from US banks as well as the US public. Thus the wartransformed the US from being an international debtor to an
international creditor. In other words, at the war™s end, the US and

its citizens owned more overseas assets than foreign governments
and citizens owned in the US.
3.2 Post-war Recovery
Post-war economic recovery proved difficult. Britain, which was

the world™s leading economy in the pre-war period, in particular

faced a prolonged crisis. While Britain was preoccupied with war,
industries had developed in India and Japan. After the war Britainfound it difficult to recapture its earlier position of dominance in
the Indian market, and to compete with Japan internationally.

Moreover, to finance war expenditures Britain had borrowed liberallyfrom the US. This meant that at the end of the war Britain was
burdened with huge external debts.
The war had led to an economic boom, that is, to a large increase indemand, production and employment. When the war boom ended,
production contracted and unemployment increased. At thesame time the government reduced bloated war expenditures tobring them into line with peacetime revenues. These developments

led to huge job losses Œ in 1921 one in every five British workers
was out of work. Indeed, anxiety and uncertainty about workbecame an enduring part of the post-war scenario.
Many agricultural economies were also in crisis. Consider the case
of wheat producers. Before the war, eastern Europe was a major

supplier of wheat in the world market. When this supply wasdisrupted during the war, wheat production in Canada, Americaand Australia expanded dramatically. But once the war was over,

production in eastern Europe revived and created a glut in wheat
output. Grain prices fell, rural incomes declined, and farmers fell
deeper into debt.3.3 Rise of Mass Production and ConsumptionIn the US, recovery was quicker. We have already seen how the war

helped boost the US economy. After a short period of economic

India and the Contemporary World94trouble in the years after the war, the US  economy resumed
its strong growth in the early 1920s.
One important feature of the US economy of the 1920swas mass production. The move towards mass production
had begun in the late nineteenth century, but in the 1920s it

became a characteristic feature of industrial production in
the US. A well-known pioneer of mass production was the

car manufacturer Henry Ford. He adapted the assembly line

of a Chicago slaughterhouse (in which slaughtered animals
were picked apart by butchers as they came down a conveyor
belt) to his new car plant in Detroit. He realised that the‚assembly line™ method would allow a faster and cheaper wayof producing vehicles. The assembly line forced workers to

repeat a single task mechanically and continuously Œ such as

fitting a particular part to the car Œ at a pace dictated by the
conveyor belt. This was a way of increasing the output per worker
by speeding up the pace of work. Standing in front of a conveyor
belt no worker could afford to delay the motions, take a break, or
even have a friendly word with a workmate. As a result, Henry
Ford™s cars came off the assembly line at three-minute intervals, a

speed much faster than that achieved by previous methods. The T-

Model Ford was the world™s first mass-produced car.
At first workers at the Ford  factory were unable to cope with the
stress of working on assembly lines in which they could not controlthe pace of work. So they quit in large numbers. In desperation

Ford doubled the daily wage to $5 in January 1914. At the same

time he banned trade unions from operating in his plants.
Henry Ford recovered the high wage by repeatedly speeding up
the production line and forcing workers to work ever harder. So

much so, he would soon describe his decision to double the daily

wage as the ‚best cost-cutting decision™ he had ever made.Fordist industrial practices soon spread in the US. They were also
widely copied in Europe in the 1920s. Mass production lowered

costs and prices of engineered goods. Thanks to higher wages,

more workers could now afford to purchase durable consumergoods such as cars. Car production in the US rose from 2 million in
1919 to more than 5 million in 1929. Similarly, there was a spurt

in the purchase of refrigerators, washing machines, radios,
gramophone players, all through a system of ‚hire purchase™ (i.e., on
Fig. 21 Œ T-Model automobiles lined up outside thefactory.
95The  Making  of  a  Global  World
credit repaid in weekly or monthly instalments). The demandfor refrigerators, washing machines, etc. was also fuelled by a boom
in house construction and home ownership, financed once again
by loans.
The housing and consumer boom of the 1920s created the basis ofprosperity in the US. Large investments in housing and household
goods seemed to create a cycle of higher employmentand incomes, rising consumption demand, more investment, and
yet more employment and incomes.
In 1923, the US resumed exporting capital to the rest of the worldand became the largest overseas lender. US imports and capital

exports also boosted European recovery and world trade andincome growth over the next six years.
All this, however, proved  too good to last. By 1929 the world
would be plunged into a depression such as it had neverexperienced before.3.4 The Great DepressionThe Great Depression began around 1929 and lasted till the mid-
1930s. During this period most parts of the world experienced
catastrophic declines in production, employment, incomes and
trade. The exact timing and impact of the depression variedacross countries. But in general, agricultural regions and communities
were the worst affected. This was because the fall
in agricultural prices was greater and more prolonged than thatin the prices of industrial goods.
The depression was caused by a combination of several factors. We
have already seen how fragile the post-war world economy was.
First: agricultural overproduction remained a problem. This wasmade worse by falling agricultural prices. As prices slumped and

agricultural incomes declined, farmers tried to expand production
and bring a larger volume of produce to the market to maintaintheir overall income. This worsened the glut in the market, pushing
down prices even further. Farm produce rotted for a lack of buyers.
Second: in the mid-1920s, many countries financed their investmentsthrough loans from the US. While it was often extremely easy to

raise loans in the US when the going was good, US overseas lenderspanicked at the first sign of trouble. In the first half of 1928, USMany years later, Dorothea Lange, the
photographer who shot this picture, recollected
the moment of her encounter with the
hungry mother:‚I saw and approached the hungry and desperatemother, as if drawn by a magnet – I did not ask

her name or her history. She told me her age,

that she was thirty-two. She said that they
(i.e., she and her seven children) had been living

on frozen vegetables from the surrounding fields,
and birds that the children killed – There she
sat – with her children huddled around her,

and seemed to know that my pictures might
help her, and so she helped me –™
From: Popular Photography
, February 1960.
Box 3Fig. 22 Œ Migrant agricultural worker™s family,homeless and hungry, during the Great
Depression, 1936. Courtesy: Library of Congress,Prints and Photographs Division.

India and the Contemporary World96overseas loans amounted to over $ 1 billion. A year later it was onequarter of that amount. Countries that depended crucially on US
loans now faced an acute crisis.
The withdrawal of US loans affected much of the rest of the world,though in different ways. In Europe it led to the failure of some

major banks and the collapse of currencies such as the British poundsterling. In Latin America and elsewhere it intensified the slump
in agricultural and raw material prices. The US attempt to protect

its economy in the depression by doubling import duties also dealtanother severe blow to world trade.The US was also the industrial country most severely affected bythe depression. With the fall in prices and the prospect of adepression, US banks had also slashed domestic lending andcalled back loans. Farms could not sell their harvests, households

were ruined, and businesses collapsed. Faced with fallingincomes, many households in the US could not repay what they hadborrowed, and were forced to give up their homes, cars and other
consumer durables. The consumerist prosperity of the 1920s now
disappeared in a puff of dust. As unemployment soared, peopletrudged long distances looking for any work they could find.
Ultimately, the US banking system itself collapsed. Unable to
recover investments, collect loans and repay depositors, thousandsof banks went bankrupt and were forced to close. The numbers
are phenomenal: by 1933 over 4,000 banks had closed andbetween 1929 and 1932 about 110, 000 companies had collapsed.By 1935, a modest economic recovery was under way in mostindustrial countries. But the Great Depression™s wider effects on
society, politics and international relations, and on peoples™ minds,
proved more enduring.
3.5 India and the Great DepressionIf we look at the impact of the depression on India we realise
how integrated the global economy had become by the early
twentieth century. The tremors of a crisis in one part of the world
were quickly relayed to other parts, affecting lives, economies andsocieties worldwide.In the nineteenth century, as you have seen, colonial India had become
an exporter of agricultural goods and importer of manufactures.
The depression immediately affected Indian trade. India™s exports
Fig. 23 Œ People lining up for unemployment
benefits, US,
 photograph by Dorothea
 Lange,1938. Courtesy: Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division.
When an unemployment census showed
10 million people out of work, the local

government in many US states began making
small allowances to the unemployed. These long
queues came to symbolise the poverty and

unemployment of the depression years.
97The  Making  of  a  Global  World
grow more jute, brothers, with the hope of greater cash.Costs and debts of jute will make your hopes get dashed.When you have spent all your money and got the crop off the ground,
– traders, sitting at home, will pay only Rs 5 a maund.and imports nearly halved between 1928 and 1934. As internationalprices crashed, prices in India also plunged. Between 1928 and 1934,
wheat prices in India fell by 50 per cent.Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban dwellers. Though
agricultural prices fell sharply, the colonial government refused to

reduce revenue demands. Peasants producing for the world market
were the worst hit.Consider the jute producers of Bengal. They grew raw jute that wasprocessed in factories for export in the form of gunny bags. But
as gunny exports collapsed, the price of raw jute crashed more than60 per cent. Peasants who borrowed in the hope of better times or
to increase output in the hope of higher incomes faced ever lowerprices, and fell deeper and deeper into debt. Thus the Bengal jutegrowers™ lament:Across India, peasants™ indebtedness increased. They used up theirsavings, mortgaged lands, and sold whatever jewellery and precious
metals they had to meet their expenses. In these depression years,
India became an exporter of precious metals, notably gold.The famous economist John Maynard Keynes thought that Indian
gold exports promoted global economic recovery. They certainly
helped speed up Britain™s recovery, but did little for the Indian peasant.
Rural India was thus seething with unrest when Mahatma Gandhi
launched the civil disobedience movement at the height of thedepression in 1931.The depression proved less grim for urban India. Because of fallingprices, those with fixed incomes Œ say town-dwelling landownerswho received rents and middle-class salaried employees Œ now foundthemselves better off. Everything cost less. Industrial investment also

grew as the government extended tariff protection to industries,under the pressure of nationalist opinion.Who profits from jute cultivation according to thejute growers™ lament? Explain.Discuss
India and the Contemporary World984  Rebuilding a World Economy: The Post-war Era
The Second World War broke out a mere two decades after the
end of the First World War. It was fought between the Axis powers

(mainly Nazi Germany, Japan and Italy)  and the Allies (Britain,

France, the Soviet Union and the US). It was a war waged for six
years on many fronts, in many places
, over land, on sea, in the air.
Once again death and destruction was enormous. At least 60 million
people, or about 3 per cent of the world™s 1939 population, are

believed to have been killed, directly or indirectly, as a result of the

war. Millions more were injured.
Unlike in earlier wars, most of these deaths took place outside thebattlefields. Many more civilians than soldiers died from war-related

causes. Vast parts of Europe and Asia were devastated, and several

cities were destroyed by aerial bombardment or relentless

artillery attacks. The war caused an immense amount of economic

devastation and social disruption. Reconstruction promised to
be long and difficult.Two crucial influences shaped post-war
reconstruction. The first was the US™s

emergence as the dominant economic, political
and military power in the Western world. The

second was the dominance of the Soviet
Union. It had made huge sacrifices to defeat
Nazi Germany, and transformed itself from

a backward agricultural country into a world
power during the very years when the capitalist
world was trapped in the Great Depression.4.1 Post-war Settlement and the
Bretton Woods InstitutionsEconomists and politicians drew two key lessons from inter-wareconomic experiences. First, an industrial society based on mass

production cannot be sustained without mass consumption. But to
ensure mass consumption, there was a need for high and stable
incomes. Incomes could not be stable if employment was unstable.

Thus stable incomes also required steady, full employment.
But markets alone could not guarantee full employment.Therefore governments would have to step in to minimiseFig. 24 Œ German forces attack Russia, July 1941.Hitler™s attempt to invade Russia was a turning
point in the war.
Fig. 25 Œ 
Stalingrad in Soviet Russia devastated by the war.
99The  Making  of  a  Global  World
Briefly summarise the two lessons learnt byeconomists and politicians from the inter-wareconomic experience?Discussfluctuations of price, output and employment. Economic stability
could be ensured only through the intervention of the government.
The second lesson related to a country™s economic links with
the outside world. The goal of full employment could only be
achieved if governments had power to control flows of goods,
capital and labour.
Thus in brief, the main aim of the post-war international economicsystem was to preserve economic stability and full employment in

the industrial world. Its framework was agreed upon at the United
Nations Monetary and Financial Conference held in July 1944 at
Bretton Woods in New Hampshire, USA.
The Bretton Woods conference established the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) to deal with external surpluses and deficits of its member
nations. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

(popularly known as the World Bank) was set up to finance post-

war reconstruction. The IMF and the World Bank are referred to

as the Bretton Woods institutions or sometimes the Bretton Woods

twins. The post-war international economic system is also often

described as the Bretton Woods system.
The IMF and the World Bank commenced financial operations
in 1947. Decision-making in these institutions is controlled by
the Western industrial powers. The US has an effective right of

veto over key IMF and World Bank decisions.
The international monetary system is the system linking nationalcurrencies and monetary system. The Bretton Woods system was

based on fixed exchange rates. In this system, national currencies,

for example the Indian rupee, were pegged to the dollar at a fixed

exchange rate. The dollar itself was anchored to gold at a fixed
price of $35 per ounce of gold.4.2 The Early Post-war Years
The Bretton Woods system inaugurated an era of unprecedented

growth of trade and incomes for the Western industrial nations and

Japan. World trade grew annually at over 8 per cent between 1950

and 1970 and incomes at nearly 5 per cent. The growth was also
mostly stable, without large fluctuations. For much of this period
the unemployment rate, for example, averaged less than 5 per centin most industrial countries.
Fig. 26 Œ Mount Washington Hotel situated inBretton Woods, US.
This is the place where the famous conference
was held.
India and the Contemporary World100These decades also saw the worldwide spread of technology and
enterprise. Developing countries were in a hurry to catch up with
the advanced industrial countries. Therefore, they invested vast

amounts of capital, importing industrial plant and equipment
featuring modern technology.
4.3 Decolonisation and IndependenceWhen the Second World War ended, large parts of the world were

still under European colonial rule. Over the next two decades most
colonies in Asia and Africa emerged as free, independent nations.

They were, however, overburdened by poverty and a lack ofresources, and their economies and societies were handicapped bylong periods of colonial rule.The IMF and the World Bank were designed to meet the financial
needs of the industrial countries. They were not equipped to cope

with the challenge of poverty and lack of development in the former

colonies. But as Europe and Japan rapidly rebuilt their economies,

they grew less dependent on the IMF and the World Bank. Thus

from the late 1950s the Bretton Woods institutions began to shift

their attention more towards developing countries.
As colonies, many of the less developed regions of the world hadbeen part of Western empires. Now, ironically, as newly independent
countries facing urgent pressures to lift their populations out ofpoverty, they came under the guidance of international agencies

dominated by the former colonial powers. Even after many years

of decolonisation, the former colonial powers still controlled vital

resources such as minerals and land in many of their former colonies.
Large corporations of other powerful countries, for example theUS, also often managed to secure rights to exploit developing

countries™ natural resources very cheaply.
At the same time, most developing countries did not benefit fromthe fast growth the Western economies experienced in the 1950s

and 1960s. Therefore they organised themselves as a group Œ the

Group of 77 (or G-77) Œ to demand a new international economicorder (NIEO). By the NIEO they meant a system that would givethem real control over their natural resources, more development
assistance, fairer prices for raw materials, and better access for their
manufactured goods in developed countries™ markets.
New wordsTariff Œ Tax imposed on a country™s imports
from the rest of the world. Tariffs are

levied at the point of entry, i.e., at the border
or the airport.What are MNCs?Multinational corporations (MNCs) are largecompanies that operate in several countries at
the same time. The first MNCs were established
in the 1920s. Many more came up in the 1950s
and 1960s as US businesses expanded worldwide
and Western Europe and Japan also recovered
to become powerful industrial economies. The
worldwide spread of MNCs was a notable feature
of the 1950s and 1960s. This was partly because
high import tariffs imposed by different
governments forced MNCs to locate their
manufacturing operations and become ‚domestic
producers™ in as many countries as possible.Box 4
101The  Making  of  a  Global  World
4.4 End of Bretton Woods and the Beginning of‚Globalisation™Despite years of stable and rapid growth, not all was well inthis post-war world. From the 1960s the rising costs of itsoverseas involvements weakened the US™s finances and competitive

strength. The US dollar now no longer commanded confidenceas the world™s principal currency. It could not maintain its value
in relation to gold. This eventually led to the collapse of thesystem of fixed exchange rates and the introduction of a system
of 
floating exchange rates
.From the mid-1970s the international financial system also changedin important ways. Earlier, developing countries could turn to

international institutions for loans and development assistance. Butnow they were forced to borrow from Western commercial banks
and private lending institutions. This led to periodic debt crises in
the developing world, and lower incomes and increased poverty,
especially in Africa and Latin America.The industrial world was also hit by unemployment that beganrising from the mid-1970s and remained high until the early 1990s.
From the late 1970s MNCs also began to shift production operationsto low-wage Asian countries.
China had been cut off from the post-war world economy sinceits revolution in 1949. But new economic policies in China andthe collapse of the Soviet Union and Soviet-style communism in
Eastern Europe brought many countries back into the fold of theworld economy.
Wages were relatively low in countries like China. Thus they became
attractive destinations for investment by foreign MNCs competingto capture world markets. Have you noticed that most of the TVs,

mobile phones, and toys we see in the shops seem to be made inChina? This is because of the low-cost structure of the Chineseeconomy, most importantly its low wages.
The relocation of industry to low-wage countries stimulated worldtrade and capital flows. In the last two decades the world™s economic
geography has been transformed as countries such as India, China
and Brazil have undergone rapid economic transformation.
New wordsExchange rates Œ 
 They link national currencies
for purposes of international trade. There arebroadly two kinds of exchange rates: fixedexchange rate and floating exchange rate
Fixed exchange rates Œ 
When exchange ratesare fixed and governments intervene to prevent
movements in them
Flexible or floating exchange rates Œ These ratesfluctuate depending on demand and supply ofcurrencies in foreign exchange markets, in
principle without interference by governments
India and the Contemporary World102Write in briefProject1.Give two examples of different types of global exchanges which took place before the
seventeenth century, choosing one example from Asia and one from the Americas.
2.Explain how the global transfer of disease in the pre-modern world helped in the
colonisation of the Americas.
3.Write a note to explain the effects of the following:
a)The British government™s decision to abolish the Corn Laws.
b)The coming of rinderpest to Africa.
c)The death of men of working-age in Europe because of the World War.
d)The Great Depression on the Indian economy.
e)The decision of MNCs to relocate production to Asian countries.
4.Give two examples from history to show the impact of technology on food availability.
5.What is meant by the Bretton Woods Agreement?
Find out more about gold and diamond mining in South Africa in the nineteenth century.
Who controlled the gold and diamond companies? Who were the miners and what weretheir lives like?Write in briefDiscuss6.Imagine that you are an indentured Indian labourer in the Caribbean. Drawing from the
details in this chapter, write a letter to your family describing your life and feelings.
7.Explain the three types of movements or flows within international economic
exchange. Find one example of each type of flow which involved India and Indians,and write a short account of it.8.Explain the causes of the Great Depression.
9.Explain what is referred to as the G-77 countries. In what ways can G-77 be seen as
a reaction to the activities of the Bretton Woods twins?ProjectDiscuss
