We use different materials and services in ourdaily life. Some of these are available in ourimmediate surroundings, while other
requirements are met by bringing things fromother places. Goods and services do not move
from supply locales to demand locales on theirown. The movement of these goods and servicesfrom their supply locations to demand locations
necessitates the need for transport. Some peopleare engaged in facilitating these movements.These are known to be traders who make theproducts come to the consumers bytransportation. Thus, the pace of development
of a country depends upon the production ofgoods and services as well as their movementover space. Therefore, efficient means of transportare pre-requisites for fast development.Movement of these goods and services can beover three important domains of our earth i.e. land,
water and air. Based on these, transport can alsobe classified into land, water and air transport.expanded far and wide. Today, the world has
been converted into a large village with the helpof efficient and fast moving transport.
Transport has been able to achieve this withthe help of equally developed communication
system. Therefore, transport, communicationand trade are complementary to each other.Today, India is well-linked with the rest ofthe world despite its vast size, diversity and
linguistic and socio-cultural plurality.Railways, airways, water ways, newspapers,radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. havebeen contributing to its socio-economic
progress in many ways. The trades from localto international levels have added to the vitalityof its economy. It has enriched our life andadded substantially to growing amenities andfacilities for the comforts of life.In this chapter, you will see how modernmeans of transport and communication serve
as life lines of our nation and its modernFig. 7.1For a long time, trade and transport wererestricted to a limited space. With the
development in science and technology, thearea of influence of trade and transporteconomy. It is thus, evident that a dense and
efficient network of transport andcommunication is a pre-requisite for local,national and global trade of today.
82CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IITRANSPORTRoadwaysIndia has one of the largest road networks inthe world, aggregating to about 2.3 million kmat present. In India, roadways have preceded
railways. They still have an edge over railwaysin view of the ease with which they can be builtand maintained. The growing importance ofroad transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rootedin the following reasons; (a) construction cost of
roads is much lower than that of railway lines,(b) roads can traverse comparatively moredissected and undulating topography, (c) roadscan negotiate higher gradients of slopes and assuch can traverse mountains such as the
Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical intransportation of few persons and relativelysmaller amount of goods over short distances,(e) it also provides door-to-door service, thusthe cost of loading and unloading is much lower,(f) road transport is also used as a feeder to other
modes of transport such as they provide a linkbetween railway stations, air and sea ports.In India, roads are classified in the followingsix classes according to their capacity. Look at
the map of the National Highways and find outabout the significant role played by these roads.ŁGolden Quadrilateral Super Highways:The government has launched a major roaddevelopment project linking Delhi-Kolkata-
Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by six-laneSuper Highways. The North-South corridorslinking Srinagar (Jammu & Kashmir) andKanyakumari (Tamil Nadu), and East-WestCorridor connecting Silcher (Assam) andPorbander (Gujarat) are part of this project.The major objective of these Super Highwaysis to reduce the time and distance betweenthe mega cities of India. These highwayprojects are being implemented by the
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI).ŁNational Highways: National Highwayslink extreme parts of the country. These arethe primary road systems and are laid andmaintained by the Central Public WorksDepartment (CPWD). A number of majorNational Highways run in North-South andEast-West directions. The historical Sher-ŁState Highways: Roads linking a statecapital with different district headquarters
are known as State Highways. These roadsare constructed and maintained by the StatePublic Works Department (PWD) in Stateand Union Territories.ŁDistrict Roads: These roads connect thedistrict headquarters with other places of thedistrict. These roads are maintained by theZila Parishad.ŁOther Roads: Rural roads, which link ruralareas and villages with towns, are classified
under this category. These roads receivedspecial impetus under the Pradhan MantriGrameen Sadak Yojana. Under this schemespecial provisions are made so that every village
in the country is linked to a major town in thecountry by an all season motorable road.Fig.7.2:  Ahmedabad- Vadodara ExpresswayFind out places linked by the NationalHighway 2 and 3.Do you know that National Highway-7is the longest and traverses 2, 369 kmbetween Varanasi and Kanyakumarivia Jabalpur, Nagpur, Hyderabad,Bangalore and Madurai. Delhi and
Mumbai are connected by NationalHighway-8, while National Highway-15covers most of Rajasthan.Shah Suri Marg is called National Highway
No.1, between Delhi and Amritsar.
