3Nationalism   in   Europe
In 1848, Frédéric Sorrieu, a French artist, prepared a series of fourprints visualising his dream of a world made up of ‚democraticand social Republics™, as he called them. The first print (Fig. 1) of the

series, shows the peoples of Europe and America Œ men and womenof all ages and social classes Œ marching in a long train, and offeringhomage to the statue of Liberty as they pass by it. As you would
recall, artists of the time of the French Revolution personified Libertyas a female figure Œ here you can recognise the torch of Enlightenmentshe bears in one hand and the Charter of the Rights of Man in the
other. On the earth in the foreground of the image lie the shattered
remains of the symbols of 
absolutist
 institutions. In Sorrieu™s
utopian vision, the peoples of the world are grouped as distinctnations, identified through their flags and national costume. Leadingthe procession, way past the statue of Liberty, are the United States
and Switzerland, which by this time were already nation-states. France,
The  Rise  of  Nationalism  in  Europe
Fig. 1 Š The Dream of Worldwide Democratic and Social Republics Œ The Pact Between Nations, a 
print prepared byFrédéric Sorrieu, 1848.
Chapter IThe Rise of Nationalism in EuropeNew wordsAbsolutist Œ Literally, a government or
system of rule that has no restraints on
the power exercised. In history, the term
refers to a form of monarchical
government that was centralised,
militarised and repressiveUtopian Œ A vision of a society that is soideal that it is unlikely to actually existIn what way do you think this print (Fig. 1)depicts a utopian vision?Activity
India and the Contemporary World4identifiable by the revolutionary tricolour, has just reached the statue.She is followed by the peoples of Germany, bearing the black, red

and gold flag. Interestingly, at the time when Sorrieu created this
image, the German peoples did not yet exist as a united nation Œ the
flag they carry is an expression of liberal hopes in 1848 to unify the
numerous German-speaking principalities into a nation-state under
a democratic constitution. Following the German peoples are the
peoples of Austria, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy,

Poland, England, Ireland, Hungary and Russia. From the heavens
above, Christ, saints and angels gaze upon the scene. They havebeen used by the artist to symbolise fraternity among the nations of
the world.This chapter will deal with many of the issues visualised by Sorrieuin Fig. 1. During the nineteenth century, nationalism emerged as a

force which brought about sweeping changes in the political andmental world of Europe. The end result of these changes was theemergence of the nation-state in place of the multi-national dynastic
empires of Europe. The concept and practices of a 
modern
 state, in
which a centralised power exercised sovereign control over a clearlydefined territory, had been developing over a long period of time

in Europe. But a nation-state was one in which the majority of its
citizens, and not only its rulers, came to develop a sense of commonidentity and shared history or descent. This commonness did not
exist from time immemorial; it was forged through struggles, through
the actions of leaders and the common people. This chapter willlook at the diverse processes through which nation-states and
nationalism came into being in nineteenth-century Europe.Ernst Renan, ‚What is a Nation?™In a lecture delivered at the University ofSorbonne in 1882, the French philosopher Ernst
Renan (1823-92) outlined his understanding of
what makes a nation. The lecture  was

subsequently published as a famous essay entitled
‚Qu™est-ce qu™une nation?™ (‚What is a Nation?™).
In this essay Renan criticises the notion suggested
by others that a nation is formed by a common
language, race, religion, or territory:‚A nation is the culmination of a long past of
endeavours, sacrifice and devotion. A heroic past,
great men, glory, that is the social capital upon

which one bases a national idea. To have

common glories in the past, to have a common
will in the present, to have performed great deeds
together, to wish to perform still more, these

are the essential conditions of being a people. A
nation is therefore a large-scale solidarity – Its
existence is a daily plebiscite – A province is itsinhabitants; if anyone has the right to be
consulted, it is the inhabitant. A nation never
has any real interest in annexing or holding on to
a country against its will. The existence of nations
is a good thing, a necessity even. Their existence
is a guarantee of liberty, which would be lost if

the world had only one law and only one master.™
SourceSource ASummarise the attributes of a nation, as Renanunderstands them. Why, in his view, are nations
important?DiscussNew wordsPlebiscite Œ A direct vote by which all thepeople of a region are asked to accept or rejecta proposal
5Nationalism   in   Europe
1  The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation
The first clear expression of nationalism came withthe French Revolution in 1789. France, as youwould remember, was a full-fledged territorial statein 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch.
The political and constitutional changes that camein the wake of the French Revolution led to thetransfer of sovereignty from the monarchy to a
body of French citizens. The revolution proclaimed
that it was the people who would henceforthconstitute the nation and shape its destiny.
From the very beginning, the French revolutionariesintroduced various measures and practices thatcould create a sense of collective identity amongst
the French people. The ideas of la patrie (the
fatherland) and le citoyen (the citizen) emphasised
the notion of a united community enjoying equal rights under a
constitution. A new French flag, the tricolour,   was chosen to replace
the former royal standard. The Estates General  was elected by the
body of active citizens and renamed the National Assembly. New

hymns were composed, oaths taken and martyrs commemorated,all in the name of the nation. A centralised administrative systemwas put in place and it formulated uniform laws for all citizens

within its territory. Internal customs duties and dues were abolished
and a uniform system of weights and measures was adopted.
Regional dialects were discouraged and French, as it was spoken
and written in Paris, became the common language of the nation.The revolutionaries further declared that it was the mission and thedestiny of the French nation to liberate the peoples of Europe
from despotism, in other words to help other peoples of Europe
to become nations.
When the news of the events in France reached the different citiesof Europe, students and other members of educated middle classesbegan setting up Jacobin clubs. Their activities and campaigns
prepared the way for the French armies which moved into Holland,

Belgium, Switzerland and much of Italy in the 1790s. With the
outbreak of the revolutionary wars, the French armies began to
carry the idea of nationalism abroad.Fig. 2 Š The cover of a German almanacdesigned by the journalist Andreas Rebmann in
1798.
The image of the French Bastille being stormed
by the revolutionary crowd has been placed
next to a similar fortress meant to represent the
bastion of despotic rule in the German province
of Kassel. Accompanying the illustration is the
slogan: ‚The people must seize their own
freedom!™ Rebmann lived in the  city of Mainz

and was  a member of a German Jacobin group.

India and the Contemporary World6Within the wide swathe of territory that came under his control,Napoleon set about introducing many of the reforms that he had
already introduced in France. Through a return to monarchy
Napoleon had, no doubt, destroyed democracy in France, but inthe administrative field he had incorporated revolutionary principlesin order to make the whole system more rational and efficient. The
Civil Code of 1804 Œ usually known as the Napoleonic Code Œdid away with all privileges based on birth, established  equality
before the law and secured  the right to property. This Code was

exported to the regions under French control. In the Dutch Republic,in Switzerland, in Italy and Germany, Napoleon simplified
administrative divisions, abolished the feudal system and freed
peasants from serfdom and manorial dues. In the towns too, guild
restrictions were removed. Transport and communication systems
were improved. Peasants, artisans, workers and new businessmenFig. 3 Š Europe after theCongress of Vienna, 1815.ICELAND(DENMARK)NORWAY
(SWEDEN)SWEDENDENMARKHABOVER(G.B.)
NETHERLANDSENGLANDWALESIRELANDGREAT
BRITAIN
SCOTLANDFRANCESPAIN
PORTUGALMOROCCOALGERIATUNISEGYPTPALESTINE
SYRIACYPRUSMESOPOTAMIA
ARMENIAOTTOMAN EMPIRECRETEGREECEBULGARIAROMANIASERBIAHUNGARYAUSTRIAN EMPIREAUSTRIAGALICIABAVARIA
SWITZERLANDPRUSSIAPOLANDRUSSIAN EMPIRESARDINIACORSICASMALLSTATES
KINGDOMOF  THE
TWOSICILIESGEORGIAPERSIAMEDITERRANEAN SEAATLANTIC  SEA

7Nationalism   in   Europe
enjoyed a new-found freedom. Businessmen and small-scaleproducers of goods, in particular, began to realise that uniform
laws, standardised weights and measures, and a common nationalcurrency would facilitate the movement and exchange of goods
and capital from one region to another.
However, in the areas conquered, the reactions of the localpopulations to French rule were mix
ed. Initially, in many places such
as Holland and Switzerland, as well as in certain cities like Brussels,Mainz, Milan and Warsaw, the French armies were welcomed as
harbingers of liberty. But the initial enthusiasm soon turned to hostility,

as it became clear that the new administrative arrangements did notgo hand in hand with political freedom. Increased taxation,censorship, forced conscription into the French armies required to

conquer the rest of Europe, all seemed to outweigh the advantagesof the administrativ
e changes.
Fig. 4 Š The Planting of Tree of Liberty in Zweibrücken, Germany.The subject of this colour print by the German painter Karl Kaspar Fritz is the occupation of the town of Zweibrücken
by the French armies. French soldiers, recognisable by their blue, white and red uniforms, have been portrayed as
oppressors as they seize a peasant™s cart (left), harass some young women (centre foreground) and force a peasantdown to his knees. The plaque being affixed to the Tree of Liberty carries a German inscription which in translationreads: ‚Take freedom and equality from us, the model of humanity.™ This is a sarcastic reference to the claim of the
French as being liberators who opposed monarchy in the territories they entered.Fig. 5 Š The courier of Rhineland loses all thathe has on his way home from Leipzig.
Napoleon here is represented as a postman on
his way back to France after he lost the battle of
Leipzig in 1813. Each letter dropping out of his
bag bears the names of the territories he lost.
India and the Contemporary World8If you look at the map of mid-eighteenth-century Europe you willfind that there were no ‚nation-states™ as we know them today.
What we know today as Germany, Italy and Switzerland were
divided into kingdoms, duchies and cantons whose rulers had their
autonomous territories. Eastern and Central Europe were under
autocratic monarchies within the territories of which lived diverse
peoples. They did not see themselves as sharing a collective identity

or a common culture. Often, they even spoke different languagesand belonged to different ethnic groups. The Habsburg Empire
that ruled over Austria-Hungary, for example, was a patchwork of

many different regions and peoples. It included the Alpine regions
Œ the Tyrol, Austria and the Sudetenland Œ as well as Bohemia,
where the aristocracy was predominantly German-speaking. It also

included the Italian-speaking provinces of Lombardy and Venetia.
In Hungary, half of the population spoke Magyar while the other
half spoke a variety of dialects. In Galicia, the aristocracy spoke

Polish. Besides these three dominant groups, there also lived within
the boundaries of the empire, a mass of subject peasant peoples ŒBohemians and Slovaks to the north, Slovenes in Carniola, Croats
to the south, and Roumans to the east in Transylvania. Such
differences did not easily promote a sense of political unity. The
only tie binding these diverse groups together was a common
allegiance to the emperor.
How did nationalism and the idea of the nation-state emerge?2.1 The Aristocracy and the New Middle ClassSocially and politically, a landed aristocracy was the dominant class
on the continent. The members of this class were united by acommon way of life that cut across regional divisions. They owned

estates in the countryside and also town-houses. They spoke French
for purposes of diplomacy and in high society. Their families were
often connected by ties of marriage. This powerful aristocracy was,
however, numerically a small group. The majority of the population
was made up of the peasantry. To the west, the bulk of the land
was farmed by tenants and small owners, while in Eastern and

Central Europe the pattern of landholding was characterised byvast estates which were cultivated by serfs.
2  The Making of Nationalism in Europe
Some important dates1797Napoleon invades Italy; Napoleonic wars
begin.1814-1815Fall of Napoleon; the Vienna Peace
Settlement.1821Greek struggle for independence begins.
1848Revolutions in Europe; artisans, industrial
workers and peasants revolt against
economic hardships; middle classes

demand constitutions and representative
governments; Italians, Germans, Magyars,
Poles, Czechs, etc. demand nation-states.1859-1870 Unification of Italy.
1866-1871Unification of Germany.
1905Slav nationalism gathers force in the
Habsburg and Ottoman Empires.
9Nationalism   in   Europe
In Western and parts of Central Europe the growth of industrial
production and trade meant the growth of towns and the emergenceof commercial classes whose existence was based on production
for the market. Industrialisation began in England in the second
half of the eighteenth century, but in France and parts of the German
states it occurred only during the nineteenth century. In its wake,
new social groups came into being: a working-class population, and

middle classes made up of industrialists, businessmen, professionals.

In Central and Eastern Europe these groups were smaller in numbertill late nineteenth century. It was among the educated, liberal middle
classes that ideas of national unity following the abolition of
aristocratic privileges gained popularity.
2.2 What did Liberal Nationalism Stand for?Ideas of national unity in early-nineteenth-century Europe were closely
allied to the ideology of liberalism. The term ‚liberalism™ derives

from the Latin root 
liber, meaning free. For the new middle classes
liberalism stood for freedom for the individual and equality of allbefore the law. Politically, it emphasised the concept of government
by consent. Since the French Revolution, liberalism had stood for
the end of autocracy and clerical privileges, a constitution and
representative government through parliament. Nineteenth-centuryliberals also stressed the inviolability of private property.
Yet, equality before the law did not necessarily stand for universal
suffrage
. You will recall that in re
volutionary France, which marked
the first political experiment in liberal democrac
y, the right to vote
and to get elected was granted exclusively to property-owning men.Men without property and all women were excluded from political
rights. Only for a brief period under the Jacobins did all adult males

enjoy suffrage. However, the Napoleonic Code went back to limitedsuffrage and reduced women to the status of a minor, subject tothe authority of fathers and husbands. Throughout the nineteenth

and early twentieth centuries women and non-propertied men
organised opposition movements demanding equal political rights.
In the economic sphere, liberalism stood for the freedom of marketsand the abolition of state-imposed restrictions on the movement

of goods and capital. During the nineteenth century this was a strong
demand of the emerging middle classes. Let us take the example of
the German-speaking regions in the first half of the nineteenth
century. Napoleon™s administrative measures had created out of
New wordsSuffrage Œ The right to vote
India and the Contemporary World10countless small principalities a confederation of 39 states. Each of
these possessed its own currency, and weights and measures. A

merchant travelling in 1833 from Hamburg to Nuremberg to sell
his goods would have had to pass through 11 customs barriers and
pay a customs duty of about 5 per cent at each one of them. Duties
were often levied according to the weight or measurement of the
goods. As each region had its own system of weights and measures,
this involved time-consuming calculation. The measure of cloth,for example, was the elle  which in each region stood for a different
length. An elle of textile material bought in Frankfurt would get you
54.7 cm of cloth, in Mainz 55.1 cm, in Nuremberg 65.6 cm, in
Freiburg 53.5 cm.Such conditions were viewed as obstacles to economic exchangeand growth by the new commercial classes, who argued for thecreation of a unified economic territory allowing the unhindered
movement of goods, people and capital.  In 1834, a customs union

or zollverein
 was formed at the initiative of Prussia and joined by
most of the German states. The union abolished tariff barriers and

reduced the number of currencies from over thirty to two. The
creation of a network of railways further stimulated mobility,
harnessing economic interests to national unification. A wave of
economic nationalism strengthened the wider nationalist sentiments
growing at the time.2.3 A New Conservatism after 1815
Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, European governments
were driven by a spirit of 
conservatism
. Conservatives believed
that established, traditional institutions of state and society Œ  like the

monarchy, the Church, social hierarchies, property and the family Œ

should be preserved. Most conservatives, however, did not propose

a return to the society of pre-revolutionary days. Rather, they realised,

from the changes initiated by Napoleon, that modernisation couldin fact strengthen traditional institutions like the monarchy. It could
make  state  power more effective and strong. A modern army, an

efficient bureaucracy, a dynamic economy, the abolition of feudalism

and serfdom could strengthen the autocratic monarchies of Europe.In 1815, representatives of the European powers Œ Britain, Russia,Prussia and Austria Œ who had collectively defeated Napoleon, metat Vienna to draw up a settlement for Europe. The Congress was
hosted by the Austrian Chancellor Duke Metternich. The delegatesEconomists began to think in terms of the nationaleconomy. They talked of how the nation could

develop and what economic measures could help
forge this nation together.
Friedrich List, Professor of Economics at theUniversity of Tübingen in Germany, wrote in 1834:
‚The aim of the zollverein is to bind the Germanseconomically into a nation. It will strengthen the
nation materially as much by protecting its
interests externally as by stimulating its internal
productivity. It ought to awaken and raise

national sentiment through a fusion of individual
and provincial interests. The German people have
realised that a free economic system is the only
means to engender national feeling.™
SourceSource BDescribe the political ends that List hopes toachieve through economic measures.DiscussNew wordsConservatism Œ A political philosophy that
stressed the importance of tradition, established
institutions and customs, and preferred gradualdevelopment to quick change
11Nationalism   in   Europe
drew up the Treaty of Vienna of 1815 with the object of undoing
most of the changes that had come about in Europe during theNapoleonic wars. The Bourbon dynasty, which had been deposed

during the French Revolution, was restored to power, and Francelost the territories it had annexed under Napoleon. A series of stateswere set up on the boundaries of France to prevent French expansion
in future. Thus the kingdom of the Netherlands, which includedBelgium, was set up in the north and Genoa was added to Piedmontin the south. Prussia was given important new territories on its western
frontiers, while Austria was given control of northern Italy. But the
German confederation of 39 states that had been set up by Napoleon
was left untouched. In the east, Russia was given part of Poland

while Prussia was given a portion of Saxony. The main intention
was to restore the monarchies that had been overthrown byNapoleon, and create a new conservative order in Europe.
Conservative regimes set up in 1815 were autocratic. They did not
tolerate criticism and dissent, and sought to curb activities thatquestioned the legitimacy of autocratic governments.  Most of them

imposed censorship laws to control what was said in newspapers,books, plays and songs and reflected the ideas of liberty and freedomPlot on a map of Europe the changes drawnup by the Vienna Congress.ActivityFig. 6 Š The Club of Thinkers, anonymous caricature dating to c. 1820.
The plaque on the left bears the inscription: ‚The most important question of today™s meeting: How
long will thinking be allowed to us?™
The board on the right lists the rules of the Club which include the following:
‚1. Silence is the first commandment of this learned society.

2. To avoid the eventuality whereby a member of this club may succumb to the temptation of
speech, muzzles will be distributed to members upon entering.™What is the caricaturist trying to depict?Discuss
India and the Contemporary World12associated with the French Revolution. The memory of the FrenchRevolution nonetheless continued to inspire liberals. One of the major

issues taken up by the liberal-nationalists, who criticised the newconservative order, was freedom of the press.
2.4 The RevolutionariesDuring the years following 1815, the fear of repression drove many
liberal-nationalists underground. Secret societies sprang up in manyEuropean states to train revolutionaries and spread their ideas. To

be revolutionary at this time meant a commitment to opposemonarchical forms that had been established after the Vienna
Congress, and to fight for liberty and freedom. Most of these
revolutionaries also saw the creation of nation-states as a necessarypart of this struggle for freedom.
One such individual was the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Mazzini.Born in Genoa in 1807, he became a member of the secret societyof the Carbonari. As a young man of 24, he was sent into exile in1831 for attempting a revolution in Liguria. He subsequently founded
two more underground societies, first, Young Italy in Marseilles,
and then, Young Europe in Berne, whose members were like-minded
young men from Poland, France, Italy and the German states.

Mazzini believed that God had intended nations to be the naturalunits of mankind. So Italy could not continue to be a patchwork ofsmall states and kingdoms. It had to be forged into a single unified

republic within a wider alliance of nations. This unification alone
could be the basis of Italian liberty. Following his model, secret
societies were set up in Germany, France, Switzerland and Poland.

Mazzini™s relentless opposition to monarchy and his vision of
democratic republics frightened the conservatives.  Metternich
described him as ‚the most dangerous enemy of our social order™.Fig. 7 Š Giuseppe Mazzini and the founding ofYoung Europe in Berne 1833.
Print by Giacomo Mantegazza.
13Nationalism   in   Europe
3  The Age of Revolutions: 1830-1848
As conservative regimes tried to consolidate their power, liberalism
and nationalism came to be increasingly associated with revolutionin many regions of Europe such as the Italian and German states,
the provinces of the Ottoman Empire, Ireland and Poland. These

revolutions were led by the liberal-nationalists belonging to the
educated middle-class elite, among whom were professors, school-
teachers, clerks and members of the commercial middle classes.
The first upheaval took place in France in July 1830.  The Bourbon
kings who had been restored to power during the conservative
reaction after 1815, were now overthrown by liberal revolutionaries
who installed a constitutional monarchy with Louis Philippe at its
head. ‚When France sneezes,™ Metternic
h once remarked, ‚the rest of
Europe catches cold.™  The July Revolution sparked an uprising in

Brussels which led to Belgium breaking away from the UnitedKingdom of the Netherlands.
An event that mobilised nationalist feelings among the educated eliteacross Europe was the Greek war of independence. Greece had
been part of the Ottoman Empire since the fifteenth century. The

growth of revolutionary nationalism in Europe sparked off a struggle
for independence amongst the Greeks which began in 1821.Nationalists in Greece got support from other Greeks living in exile
and also from many West Europeans who had sympathies for ancient

Greek culture. Poets and artists lauded Greece as the cradle of

European civilisation and mobilised public opinion to support its
struggle against a Muslim empire. The English poet Lord Byron
organised funds and later went to fight in the war, where he died offever in 1824. Finally, the Treaty of Constantinople of 1832

recognised Greece as an independent nation.3.1 The Romantic Imagination and National FeelingThe development of nationalism did not come about only through
wars and territorial expansion. Culture played an important role increating the idea of the nation: art and poetry, stories and music
helped express and shape nationalist feelings.
Let us look at Romanticism, a cultural movement which sought todevelop a particular form of nationalist sentiment. Romantic artists

and poets generally criticised the glorification of reason and science
India and the Contemporary World14Fig. 8 Š The Massacre at Chios, Eugene Delacroix, 1824.The French painter Delacroix was one of the most important French Romantic
painters. This huge painting (4.19m x 3.54m) depicts an incident in which
20,000 Greeks were said to have been killed by Turks on the island of Chios. By
dramatising the incident, focusing on the suffering of women and children, and
using vivid colours, Delacroix sought to appeal to the emotions of the spectators,
and create sympathy for the Greeks.and focused instead on emotions, intuition and mystical feelings.
Their effort was to create a sense of a shared collective heritage, a
common cultural past, as the basis of a nation.Other Romantics such as the German philosopher Johann Gottfried
Herder (1744-1803) claimed that true German culture was to be

discovered among the common people Œ das volk. It was throughfolk songs, folk poetry and folk dances that the true spirit of thenation (volksgeist) was popularised. So collecting and recording theseforms of folk culture was essential to the project of nation-building.

15Nationalism   in   Europe
The Grimm Brothers: Folktales andNation-buildingGrimms™ Fairy Tales
 is a familiar name. The brothers
Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm were born in the
German city of Hanau in 1785 and 1786

respectively. While both of them studied law,

they soon developed an interest in collecting old
folktales. They spent six years travelling from
village to village, talking to people and writing
down fairy tales, which were handed down
through the generations. These were popular
both among children and adults. In 1812, they
published their first collection of tales.
Subsequently, both the brothers became active

in liberal politics, especially the movement
for freedom of the press. In the meantime they
also published a 33-volume dictionary of the
German language.The Grimm brothers also saw French dominationas a threat to German culture, and believed that
the folktales they had collected were expressions
of a pure and authentic German spirit. They

considered their projects of collecting folktales
and developing the German language as part of
the wider effort to oppose French domination
and create a German national identity.
The emphasis on vernacular language and the collection of localfolklore was not just to recover an ancient national spirit, but also tocarry the modern nationalist message to large audiences who weremostly illiterate. This was especially so in the case of Poland, which

had been partitioned at the end of the eighteenth century by the
Great Powers Œ Russia, Prussia and Austria. Even though Poland no
longer existed as an independent territory, national feelings were kept
alive through music and language. Karol Kurpinski, for example,
celebrated the national struggle through his operas and music, turning

folk dances like the polonaise and mazurka into nationalist symbols.
Language too played an important role in developing nationalistsentiments. After Russian occupation, the Polish language was forced

out of schools and the Russian language was imposed everywhere.
In 1831, an armed rebellion against Russian rule took place which
was ultimately crushed. Following this, many members of the clergy
in Poland began to use language as a weapon of national resistance.

Polish was used for Church gatherings and all religious instruction.

As a result, a large number of priests and bishops were put in jail orsent to Siberia by the Russian authorities as punishment for theirrefusal to preach in Russian. The use of Polish came to be seen as a

symbol of the struggle against Russian dominance.
3.2 Hunger, Hardship and Popular Revolt
The 1830s were years of great economic hardship in Europe. Thefirst half of the nineteenth century saw an enormous increase in
population all over Europe. In most countries there were more
seekers of jobs than employment. Population from rural areas

migrated to the cities to live in overcrowded slums. Small producers
in towns were often faced with stiff competition from imports ofcheap machine-made goods from England, where industrialisation
was more advanced than on the continent. This was especially so in
textile production, which was carried out mainly in homes or smallworkshops and was only partly mechanised. In those regions ofEurope where the aristocracy still enjo
yed power, peasants struggled
under the burden of feudal dues and obligations. The rise of food

prices or a year of bad harvest led to widespread pauperism in
town and country.
The year 1848 was one such year. Food shortages and widespread
unemployment brought the population of Paris out on the roads.

Barricades were erected and Louis Philippe was forced to flee. ADiscuss the importance of language andpopular traditions in the creation of nationalidentity.
DiscussBox 1
India and the Contemporary World16National Assembly proclaimed a Republic, granted suffrage to alladult males above 21, and guaranteed the right to work. Nationalworkshops to provide employment were set up.
Earlier, in 1845, weavers in Silesia had led a revolt against contractorswho supplied them raw material and gave them orders for finishedtextiles but drastically reduced their payments. The journalist Wilhelm
Wolff described the events in a Silesian village as follows:
In these villages (with 18,000 inhabitants) cotton weaving is themost widespread occupation – The misery of the workers isextreme. The desperate need for jobs has been taken advantage
of by the contractors to reduce the prices of the goods theyorder –On 4 June at 2 p.m. a large crowd of weavers emerged from
their homes and marched in pairs up to the mansion of theircontractor demanding higher wages. They were treated with
scorn and threats alternately. Following this, a group of them

forced their way into the house, smashed its elegant window-panes, furniture, porcelain – another group broke into thestorehouse and plundered it of supplies of cloth which they
tore to shreds – The contractor fled with his family to a
neighbouring village which, however, refused to shelter such aperson. He returned 24 hours 
later having requisitioned the army.
In the exchange that followed, eleven weavers were shot.Fig. 9 Š Peasants™ uprising, 1848.Describe the cause of the Silesian weavers™uprising. Comment on the viewpoint of thejournalist.DiscussImagine you are a weaver who saw the events
as they unfolded. Write a report on what you saw.
Activity
17Nationalism   in   Europe
3.3 1848: The Revolution of the LiberalsParallel to the revolts of the poor, unemployed and starving peasants
and workers in many European countries in the year 1848, a revolution
led by the educated middle classes was under way. Events of February
1848 in France had brought about the abdication of the monarchand a republic based on universal male suffrage had been proclaimed.
In other parts of Europe where independent nation-states did notyet exist Œ such as Germany, Italy, Poland, the Austro-Hungarian
Empire Œ men and women of the liberal middle classes combined
their demands for constitutionalism with national unification. Theytook advantage of the growing popular unrest to push their
demands for the creation of a nation-state on parliamentary
principles Œ a constitution, freedom of the press and freedomof association.In the German regions a large number of political associations whose
members were middle-class professionals, businessmen andprosperous artisans came together in the city of Frankfurt and decidedto vote for an all-German National Assembly. On 18
 May 1848,
831 elected representatives marched in a festive procession to taketheir places in the Frankfurt parliament convened in the Church ofSt Paul. They drafted a constitution for a German nation to be

headed by a monarchy subject to a parliament. When the deputiesoffered the crown on these terms to Friedrich Wilhelm IV, King of
Prussia, he rejected it and joined other monarchs to oppose the
elected assembly. While the opposition of the aristocracy and military
became stronger, the social basis of parliament eroded. Theparliament was dominated by the middle classes who resisted the
demands of workers and artisans and consequently lost their support.In the end troops were called in and the assembly was forcedto disband.The issue of extending political rights to women was a controversialone within the liberal movement, in which large numbers of womenhad participated actively over the years. Women had formed their

own political associations, founded newspapers and taken part inpolitical meetings and demonstrations. Despite this they were denied
How were liberty and equality for womento be defined?The liberal politician Carl Welcker, an elected
member of the Frankfurt Parliament, expressed
the following views:‚Nature has created men and women to carry
out different functions – Man, the stronger, the

bolder and freer of the two, has been designated
as protector of the family, its provider, meant for

public tasks in the domain of law, production,
defence. Woman, the weaker, dependent and

timid, requires the protection of man. Her sphere
is the home, the care of the children, the
nurturing of the family – Do we require any
further proof that given such differences, equality
between the sexes would only endanger
harmony and destroy the dignity of the family?™Louise Otto-Peters (1819-95) was a politicalactivist who founded a women™s journal and
subsequently a feminist political association. The
first issue of her newspaper (21 April 1849) carried
the following editorial:‚Let us ask how many men, possessed by
thoughts of living and dying for the sake of Liberty,

would be prepared to fight for the freedom of
the entire people, of all human beings? When
asked this question, they would all too easily
respond with a ﬁYes!ﬂ, though their untiring

efforts are intended for the benefit of only one
half of humanity Œ men. But Liberty is indivisible!
Free men therefore must not tolerate to be
surrounded by the unfree –™
An anonymous reader of the same newspapersent the following letter to the editor on 25 June
1850:‚It is indeed ridiculous and unreasonable to denywomen political rights even though they enjoy
the right to property which they make use
of. They perform functions and assume

responsibilities without however getting the
benefits that accrue to men for the same – Why
this injustice? Is it not a disgrace that even the
stupidest cattle-herder possesses the right
to vote, simply because he is a man, whereas
highly talented women owning considerable
property are excluded from this right, even
though they contribute so much to the
maintenance of the state?™SourceSource CNew wordsFeminist Œ Awareness of women™s rights and interests based on
the belief of the social, economic and political equality of the genders
