India is an agriculturally important country.Two-thirds of its population is engaged inagricultural activities. Agriculture is a primaryactivity, which produces most of the food thatwe consume. Besides food grains, it alsoproduces raw material for various industries.Can you name some industries based onagricultural raw material?Moreover, some agricultural products liketea, coffee, spices, etc. are also exported.TYPES OF FARMINGAgriculture is an age-old economic activity inour country. Over these years, cultivationmethods have changed significantly dependingupon the characteristics of physicalenvironment, technological know-how andsocio-cultural practices. Farming varies from
subsistence to commercial type. At present, indifferent parts of India, the following farmingsystems are practised.Primitive Subsistence FarmingThis type of farming is still practised in fewpockets of India. Primitive subsistenceagriculture is practised on small patches ofland with the help of primitive tools like hoe,dao and digging sticks, and family/communitylabour. This type of farming depends uponmonsoon, natural fertility of the soil andsuitability of other environmental conditionsto the crops grown.It is a ‚slash and burn™ agriculture.Farmers clear a patch of land and produce
cereals and other food crops to sustain theirfamily. When the soil fertility decreases, thefarmers shift and clear a fresh patch of landfor cultivation. This type of shifting allowsNature to replenish the fertility of the soilthrough natural processes; land productivity
in this type of agriculture is low as the farmerdoes not use fertilisers or other moderninputs. It is known by different names indifferent parts of the country.Can you name  some such types of farmings?It is jhumming in north-eastern states likeAssam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland;Pamlou in Manipur, Dipa in Bastar district ofChhattishgarh, and in Andaman and Nicobar
Islands.Jhumming: The ‚slash and burn™ agricultureis known as ‚Milpa™ in Mexico and CentralAmerica, ‚Conuco™ in Venzuela, ‚Roca™ inBrazil, ‚Masole™ in Central Africa, ‚Ladang™
in Indonesia, ‚Ray™ in Vietnam.In India, this primitive form of cultivationis called ‚Bewar™ or ‚Dahiya™ in MadhyaPradesh, ‚Podu™ or ‚Penda™ in Andhra Pradesh,
‚Pama Dabi™ or ‚Koman™ or Bringa™ in Odisha,‚Kumari™ in Western Ghats, ‚Valre™ or ‚Waltre™in South-eastern Rajasthan, ‚Khil™ in the
Himalayan belt, ‚Kuruwa™ in Jharkhand, and
‚Jhumming™ in the North-eastern region.Fig. 4.1
Fig. 4.2:  Banana plantation in Southernpart of IndiaFig. 4.3:  Bamboo plantation in North-eastCan you name the type of farming Rinjha™sfamily is engaged in?Can you enlist some crops which are grownin such farming?Intensive Subsistence FarmingThis type of farming is practised in areas ofhigh population pressure on land. It is labour-intensive farming, where high doses ofbiochemical inputs and irrigation are used forobtaining higher production.Can you name some of the states of Indiawhere such farming is practised?Though the ‚right of inheritance™ leading tothe division of land among successivegenerations has rendered land-holding size
uneconomical, the farmers continue to takemaximum output from the limited land in theabsence of alternative source of livelihood.Thus, there is enormous pressure onagricultural land.Commercial FarmingThe main characteristic of this type of farmingis the use of higher doses of modern inputs,e.g. high yielding variety (HYV) seeds, chemicalfertilisers, insecticides and pesticides in order
to obtain higher productivity. The degree ofcommercialisation of agriculture varies fromone region to another. For example, rice is acommercial crop in Haryana and Punjab, but
in Odisha, it is a subsistence crop.Can you give some more examples of cropswhich may be commercial in one region andmay provide subsistence in another region?Plantation is also a type of commercialfarming. In this type of farming, a single cropis grown on a large area. The plantation has
an interface of agriculture and industry.Plantations cover large tracts of land, usingcapital intensive inputs, with the help ofmigrant labourers. All the produce is used asraw material in respective industries.In India, tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane,banana, etc.. are important plantation crops.
Tea in Assam and North Bengal coffee inRinjha lived with her family in a small villageat the outskirts of Diphu in Assam. She enjoyswatching her family members clearing,
slashing and burning a patch of land forcultivation. She often helps them in irrigatingthe fields with water running through abamboo canal from the nearby spring. Sheloves the surroundings and wants to stay
here as long as she can, but this little girlhas no idea about the declining fertility ofthe soil and her family™s search for fresh apatch of land in the next season.Karnataka are some of the important plantationcrops grown in these states. Since theproduction is mainly for market, a well-
developed network of transport andcommunication connecting the plantationareas, processing industries and markets playsan important role in the development ofplantations.35AGRICULTURE
36CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IICROPPING PATTERNYou have studied the physical diversities andplurality of cultures in India. These are alsoreflected in agricultural practices and
cropping patterns in the country. Varioustypes of food and fibre crops, vegetables andfruits, spices and condiments, etc. constitutesome of the important crops grown in the
country. India has three cropping seasons Šrabi, kharif and zaid.Rabi crops are sown in winter from Octoberto December and harvested in summer from
April to June. Some of the important rabi crops
are wheat, barley, peas, gram and mustard.
Though, these crops are grown in large parts
of India, states from the north and north-western parts such as Punjab, Haryana,Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh are important
for the production of wheat and other rabi
crops. Availability of precipitation duringwinter months due to the western temperatecyclones helps in the success of these crops.
However, the success of the green revolutionin Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh
and parts of Rajasthan has also been animportant factor in the growth of the above-mentioned rabi crops.Kharif crops are grown with the onset ofmonsoon in different parts of the country and
these are harvested in September-October.Important crops grown during this season are
paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar), moong,urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and soyabean.
Some of the most important rice-growing
regions are Assam, West Bengal, coastal regionsof Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala and Maharashtra,  particularly
the (Konkan coast) along with Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar. Recently, paddy has also becomean important crop of Punjab and Haryana. Instates like Assam, West Bengal and Odisha,three crops of paddy are grown in a year. Theseare Aus, Aman and Boro.In between the rabi and the kharif seasons,there is a short season during the summermonths known as the Zaid season. Some ofthe crops produced during ‚zaid™ are
watermelon, muskmelon, cucumber,vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takesalmost a year to grow.Major CropsA variety of food and non food crops are grownin different parts of the country dependingupon the variations in soil, climate andcultivation practices. Major crops grown inIndia are rice, wheat, millets, pulses, tea, coffee,
sugarcane, oil seeds, cotton and jute, etc.Rice: It is the staple food crop of a majority ofthe people in India. Our country is the secondlargest producer of rice in the world after China.It is a kharif crop which requires high
temperature, (above 25°C) and high humiditywith annual rainfall above 100 cm. In the areasof less rainfall, it grows with the help of irrigation.Rice is grown in the plains of north andnorth-eastern India, coastal areas and the
deltaic regions. Development of dense networkFig. 4.4 (b):  Rice is ready to be harvested in the fieldFig. 4.4 (a):  Rice Cultivation
37AGRICULTUREIndia:  Distribution of Rice
38CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IIof canal irrigation and tubewells have made itpossible to grow rice in areas of less rainfallsuch as Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan.Wheat: This is the second most importantcereal crop. It is the main food crop, in northand north-western part of the country. Thisrabi crop requires a cool growing season and
a bright sunshine at the time of ripening. Itrequires 50 to 75 cm of annual rainfall evenly-distributed over the growing season. There aretwo important wheat-growing zones in thecountry Œ the Ganga-Satluj plains in the north-
west and black soil region of the Deccan. Themajor wheat-producing states are Punjab,Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan andparts of Madhya Pradesh.Fig. 4.5:  Wheat CultivationMillets: Jowar, bajra and ragi are theimportant millets grown in India. Though,these are known as coarse grains, they havevery high nutritional value. For example, ragiis very rich in iron, calcium, other micronutrients and roughage. Jowar is the third
most important food crop with respect to areaand production. It is a rain-fed crop mostlygrown in the moist areas which hardly needsirrigation. Major Jowar producing States wereMaharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and
Madhya Pradesh in 2011-12.Bajra grows well on sandy soils and shallowblack soil. Major Bajra producing States were:Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra,Gujarat and Haryana in 2011-12. Ragi is aFig. 4.6:  Bajra Cultivationcrop of dry regions and grows well on red,
black, sandy, loamy and shallow black soils.Major ragi producing states are: Karnataka,Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,Sikkim, Jharkhand and Arunachal Pradesh.Maize: It is a crop which is used both as foodand fodder. It is a kharif crop which requirestemperature between 21°C to 27°C and growswell in old alluvial soil. In some states like BiharFig. 4.7:  Maize Cultivationmaize is grown in rabi season also. Use of modern
inputs such as HYV seeds, fertilisers and irrigationhave contributed to the increasing production ofmaize. Major maize-producing states areKarnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, AndhraPradesh, Telangana and Madhya Pradesh.Pulses: India is the largest producer as wellas the consumer of pulses in the world. Theseare the major source of protein in a vegetariandiet. Major pulses that are grown in India aretur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and
39AGRICULTUREIndia:  Distribution of Wheat
40CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IIstates are Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra,Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Bihar, Punjab and Haryana.Oil Seeds: In 2008 India was the secondlargest producer of groundnut in the world
after china. In rape seed production India was
third largest producer in the world after
Canada and China in 2008. Different oil seedsare grown covering approximately 12 per centof the total cropped area of the country. Main
oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut,
mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean,
castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed andsunflower. Most of these are edible and usedas cooking mediums. However, some of theseare also used as raw material in the productionof soap, cosmetics and ointments.Groundnut is a kharif crop and accountsfor about half of the major oilseeds produced in
the country. Gujarat was the largest producer
of groundnut followed by Andhra Pradesh andTamil Nadu in 2011-12. Linseed and mustardare rabi crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north
and rabi crop in south India. Castor seed isgrown both as rabi and kharif crop.Tea: Tea cultivation is an example ofplantation agriculture. It is also an important
beverage crop introduced in India initially bythe British. Today, most of the tea plantations
are owned by Indians. The tea plant grows well
in tropical and sub-tropical climates endowedwith deep and fertile well-drained soil, rich inhumus and organic matter. Tea bushesrequire warm and moist frost-free climate allthrough the year. Frequent showers evenlydistributed over the year ensure continuousgrowth of tender leaves. Tea is a labour-intensive industry. It requires abundant,Fig. 4.8:  Sugarcane CultivationFig. 4.9:  Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are ready to be harvested in the fieldgram. Can you distinguish which of these
pulses are grown in the kharif season andwhich are grown in the rabi season? Pulsesneed less moisture and survive even in dry
conditions. Being leguminous crops, all thesecrops except arhar help in restoring soil fertilityby fixing nitrogen from the air. Therefore, theseare mostly grown in rotation with other crops.
Major pulse producing states in India  are
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,Maharashtra and Karnataka.Food Crops other than GrainsSugarcane: It is a tropical as well as asubtropical crop. It grows well in hot andhumid climate with a temperature of 21°C to27°C and an annual rainfall between 75cm.and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the regionsof low rainfall. It can be grown on a variety ofsoils and needs manual labour from sowing toharvesting. India is the second largest producerof sugarcane only after Brazil. It is the mainsource of sugar, gur (jaggary), khandsari andmolasses. The major sugarcane-producing
41AGRICULTUREcheap and skilled labour.Tea is processed withinthe tea garden to restoreits freshness. Major tea-
producing states areAssam, hills of Darjeelingand Jalpaiguri districts,
West Bengal, Tamil Naduand Kerala. Apart from
these, Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Meghalaya,
Andhra Pradesh andTripura are also tea-producing states in thecountry. In 2008 India was the third largestproducer of tea after China and Turkey.Coffee: In 2008 India produced 3.2 per centof the world coffee production. Indian coffee isknown in the world for its good quality. The
Arabica variety initially brought from Yemen isproduced in the country. This variety is in great
demand all over the world. Intially its cultivation
was introduced on the Baba Budan Hills andeven today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiriin Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.tropical as well as temperate fruits. Mangoesof Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, oranges ofNagpur and Cherrapunjee (Meghalaya),
bananas of Kerala, Mizoram, Maharashtra andTamil Nadu, lichi and guava of Uttar Pradeshand Bihar, pineapples of Meghalaya, grapes ofAndhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra,apples, pears, apricots and walnuts of Jammuand Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh are in
great demand the world over.Fig. 4.12:  Apricots, apple and pomegranateFig. 4.13:  Cultivation of vegetablesŒ peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjalHorticulture Crops: In 2008 India was thesecond largest producer of fruits and vegetables
in the world after China. India is a producer ofFig. 4.10:  Tea CultivationIndia produces about 13 per cent of theworld™s vegetables. It is an importantproducer of pea, cauliflower, onion, cabbage,tomato, brinjal and potato.Fig. 4.11:  Tea-leaves Harvesting
42CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IIFig. 4.14:  Consumption of natural rubber - 2010-11Non-Food CropsRubber: It is an equatorial crop, but underspecial conditions, it is also grown in tropicaland sub-tropical areas. It requires moist andhumid climate with rainfall of more than 200
cm. and temperature above 25°C.Rubber is an important industrial rawmaterial. It is mainly grown in Kerala, TamilNadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicobarislands and Garo hills of Meghalaya. In 2010-11India ranked fourth among the world™s naturalrubber producers.plateau. It requires high temperature, light
rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days andbright sun-shine for its growth. It is a kharif
crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.Major cotton-producing states areŒMaharashtra,  Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, TamilNadu, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.Jute: It is known as the golden fibre. Jutegrows well on well-drained fertile soils in the
flood plains where soils are renewed everyyear. High temperature is required during thetime of growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam,Odisha and Meghalaya are the major juteproducing states. It is used in making gunnybags, mats, ropes, yarn, carpets and otherartefacts. Due to its high cost, it is losingmarket to synthetic fibres and packing
materials, particularly the nylon.Technological and Institutional ReformsIt was mentioned in the previous pages thatagriculture has been practised in India forthousands of years. Sustained uses of land
without compatible techno-institutionalchanges have hindered the pace ofagricultural development. Inspite ofdevelopment of sources of irrigation most ofthe farmers in large parts of the country still
depend upon monsoon and natural fertilityin order to carry on their agriculture. For agrowing population, this poses a seriouschallenge. Agriculture which provideslivelihood for more than 60 per cent of its
population, needs some serious technical andList the items which are made of rubber andare used by us.Fig. 4.15:  Cotton CultivationFibre Crops: Cotton, jute, hemp and naturalsilk are the four major fibre crops grown in India.The first three are derived from the crops grown
in the soil, the latter is obtained from cocoons ofthe silkworms fed on green leaves speciallymulberry. Rearing of silk worms for theproduction of silk fibre is known as sericulture.Cotton: India is believed to be the originalhome of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the
main raw materials for cotton textile industry.In 2008 India was second largest producer ofcotton after China. Cotton grows well in drierparts of the black cotton soil of the DeccanSource : Statistics and Planning Department RubberBoard, Kottayam, Kerala62.2%Auto Tyres
and Tubes4.7%Others4.1%DippedGoods4%Latex Foam4.6%Belts andHoses6.6%Footwears4.6%Camel Back9.2%Cycle Tyres
and Tubes
43AGRICULTUREFig. 4.16:  Modern technological equipments used in agricultureBhoodan Œ GramdanMahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave ashis spiritual heir. He also participated inSatyagraha as one of the foremost
satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries ofGandhi™s concept of gram swarajya. AfterGandhiji™s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhaveundertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji™smessage covered almost the entire country.Once, when he was delivering a lecture atPochampalli in Andhra Pradesh, some poor
landless villagers demanded some land fortheir economic well-being. Vinoba Bhavecould not promise it to them immediatelybut assured them to talk to the Governmentof India regarding provision of land for them
if they undertook cooperative farming.Suddenly, Shri Ram Chandra Reddy stoodup and offered 80 acres of land to be
distributed among 80 land-less villagers.This act was known as ‚Bhoodan™. Later hetravelled and introduced his ideas widely allover India. Some zamindars, owners ofmany villages offered to distribute somevillages among the landless. It was knownas Gramdan. However, many land-ownerschose to provide some part of their land toinstitutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation,
consolidation of holdings, cooperation andabolition of zamindari, etc. were given priorityto bring about institutional reforms in the
country after Independence. ‚Land reform™ wasthe main focus of our First Five Year Plan. Theright of inheritance had already lead to
fragmentation of land holdings necessitatingconsolidation of holdings.The laws of land reforms were enacted butthe laws of implementation was lacking or
lukewarm. The Government of Indiaembarked upon introducing agriculturalreforms to improve Indian agriculture in the
1960s and 1970s. The Green Revolutionbased on the use of package technology andthe White Revolution (Operation Flood) weresome of the strategies initiated to improve thelot of Indian agriculture. But, this too led to
the concentration of development in fewselected areas. Therefore, in the 1980s and1990s, a comprehensive land developmentprogramme was initiated, which included bothinstitutional and technical reforms. Provision
for crop insurance against drought, flood,cyclone, fire and disease, establishment ofGrameen banks, cooperative societies andbanks for providing loan facilities to thefarmers at lower rates of interest were some
important steps in this direction.Kissan Credit Card (KCC), PersonalAccident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are someother schemes introduced by the Governmentof  India for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover,special weather bulletins and agriculturalprogrammes for farmers were introduced onthe radio and television. The government alsoannounces minimum support price,remunerative and procurement prices forimportant crops to check the exploitation of
farmers by speculators and middlemen.
44CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IImechanisation. Subsidy on fertilisers isdecreased leading to increase in the cost of
production. Moreover, reduction in importduties on agricultural products have proved
detrimental to agriculture in the country.
Farmers are withdrawing their investment
from agriculture causing a downfall in theemployment in agriculture.Contribution of agriculture to the nationaleconomy, employment and outputAgriculture has been the backbone of theIndian economy though its share in the GrossDomestic Product (GDP) has registered a
declining trend from 1951 onwards; in2010-11 about 52 per cent of the total workforce was employed by the farm sector which
makes more than half of the Indian Populationdependent on agriculture for sustenance.The declining share of agriculture in theGDP is a matter of serious concern becauseany decline and stagnation in agriculture willlead to a decline in other spheres of theeconomy having wider implications for society.Considering the importance of agriculturein India, the Government of India made
concerted efforts to modernise agriculture.
Establishment of Indian Council of AgriculturalResearch (ICAR), agricultural universities,veterinary services and animal breeding
centres, horticulture development, research
and development in the field of meteorology andweather forecast, etc. were given priority forimproving Indian agriculture. Apart from this,
improving the rural infrastructure was alsoconsidered essential for the same.Find out why an Indian farmer does not want
his son to become a farmer.When farmers have been facing so manyproblems and land under agriculture isdecreasing, can we think of alternativeemployment opportunities in the agriculture
sector?Why are farmers committing suicides inseveral states of the country?FOOD SECURITYYou know that food is a basic need and everycitizen of the country should have access tofood which provides minimum nutritional level.If any segment of our population does not havethis access, that segment suffers from lack offood security. The number of people who donot have food security is disproportionately
large in some regions of our country,particularly in economically less developedstates with higher incidence of poverty. Theremote areas of the country are more prone tonatural disasters and uncertain food supply.
In order to ensure availability of food to allsections of society our government carefullydesigned a national food security system. Itconsists of two components (a) buffer stock and(b) public distribution system (PDS).the poor farmers due to the fear of landceiling act. This Bhoodan-Gramdanmovement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is alsoknown as the Blood-less Revolution.Table 4.1: India: Growth of GDP andmajor sectors (in %)SectorTenth Five11th Five2012-17Year PlanYear PlanTarget I Target II(2002-07)(2007-12)
Agriculture1.73.24.04.2
Industries8.37.49.6
10.9Services9.010.010.010.0
GDP7.28.29.09.5
Source: Faster, Sustainable and more Inclusive:An approach to the 12th Five Year Plan, PlanningCommission, Government of IndiaŒ2011.From the Table 4.1, it is clear that thoughthe GDP growth rate is increasing over the
years, it is not generating sufficient
employment opportunities in the country. The
growth rate in agriculture is decelerating
which is an alarming situation. Today, Indianfarmers are facing a big challenge frominternational competition and our government
is going ahead with reduction in the public
investment in agriculture sector particularly
in irrigation, power, rural roads, market and
45AGRICULTUREAs you know, PDS is a programme whichprovides food grains and other essentialcommodities at subsidised prices in rural and
urban areas.India™s food security policy has a primaryobjective to ensure availability of foodgrains
to the common people at an affordable price.It has enabled the poor to have access to food.The focus of the policy is on growth in
agriculture production and on fixing thesupport price for procurement of wheat andrice, to maintain their stocks. Food
Corporation of India (FCI) is responsible for
procuring and stocking foodgrains, whereasdistribution is ensured by public distributionsystem (PDS).The FCI procures foodgrains from thefarmers at the government announced
minimum support price (MSP). The
government used to provide subsidies onagriculture inputs such as fertilizers, powerand water. These subsidies have now reachedunsustainable levels and have  also led to large
scale inefficiencies in the use of these scarceinputs. Excessive and imprudent use offertilizers and water has led to waterlogging,
salinity and depletion of essentialmicronutrients in the soil. The high MSP,subsidies in input and committed FCIpurchases have distorted the cropping pattern.Wheat and paddy crops are being grown morefor the MSP they get. Punjab and Haryana are
foremost examples. This has also created aserious imbalance in inter-crop parities.You already know that the consumers aredivided into two categories : below poverty line(BPL) and above poverty line (APL), with theissue price being different for each category.However, this categorisation is not perfect anda number of deserving poor have beenexcluded from the BPL category. Moreover,some of the so called APL slip back to BPL,because of the failure of even one crop and itis administratively difficult to accommodatesuch shifts.Each district and block can be made selfsufficient in foodgrain production if governmentprovides proper agricultural infrastructure,credit linkages and also encourages the use oflatest techniques. Instead of concentrating onlyon rice or wheat, the food crop with a bettergrowth potential in that particular area must
be encouraged. Creation of necessaryinfrastructure like irrigation facilities,
availability of electricity etc. may also attractprivate investments in agriculture.The focus on increasing foodgrainproduction which should be on a sustainable
basis and also free trade in grains will create
massive employment and reduce poverty in
rural areas.There has been a gradual shift fromcultivation of food crops to cultivation of fruits,
vegetables, oil-seeds and industrial crops. This
has led to the reduction in net sown area under
cereals and pulses. With the growing
population of India, the declining foodproduction puts a big question mark over thecountry™s future food security. The competition
for land between non-agricultural uses such
as housing etc. and agriculture has resulted
in reduction in the net sown area. The
productivity of land has started showing a
declining trend. Fertilisers, pesticides and
insecticides, which once showed dramatic
results, are now being held responsible for
degrading the soils. Periodic scarcity of waterhas led to reduction in area under irrigation.Inefficient water management has led to water
logging and salinity.Table 4.2: India: Foodgrains production(million tonnes) Cereals2006-2007-2008-2009-
2010-1107080910
(Provisional)Rice93.496.799.2
89.1095.3Wheat75.878.680.7
80.8085.9Coarse
grainsJowar &18.017.416.316.616.5
Bajra)Pulses14.214.814.6
14.7018.1Total201.4207.5210.8201.2215.8
Source: Directorate of Economics and Statistics,Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Economic Survey, 2011-12.Draw bar diagram showing the trend of foodgrain production in India during last five years.Find out the reason of this trend.
46CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IIOne important reason is land degradation.Free power to a section of farmers hasencouraged them to pump groundwater togrow water-intensive crops in low-rainfallareas (rice in Punjab, sugarcane in
Maharashtra). This unsustainable pumping
has reduced water storage in aquifers.Consequently, many wells and tubewells haverun dry. This has pushed the marginal andsmall farmers out of cultivation.The big farmers with deeper tubewells stillhave water, but many others face a water crisis.Inadequate storage and marketing facilities alsoact as a disincentive to the farmer. Thus, thefarmers are badly affected by the uncertainties
of production and market. They suffer from a
double disadvantage as they pay high pricesfor inputs such as HYV seeds, fertilisers etc. butlack the bargaining power to fix prices in theirfavour. All the production reaches the marketsimultaneously. The higher the supply the
lower is the demand. This causes distress salealso. Therefore, there can be no food security
without the security of the small farmers.Impact of Globalisation on AgricultureGlobalisation is not a new phenomenon. It wasthere at the time of colonisation. In thenineteenth century when European traders
came to India, at that time too, Indian spiceswere exported to different countries of the worldand farmers of south India were encouragedto grow these crops. Till today it is one of theimportant items of export from India.During the British period cotton belts ofIndia attracted the British and ultimatelycotton was exported to Britain as a raw materialfor their textile industries. Cotton textileindustry in Manchester and Liverpool
flourished due to the availability of goodOrganise a debate on food security of India, its need and efforts
47AGRICULTUREquality cotton from India. You have read aboutthe Champaran movement which started in1917 in Bihar. This was started becausefarmers of that region were forced to growindigo on their land because it was necessaryfor the textile industries which were located inBritain. They were unable to grow foodgrainsto sustain their families.Under globalisation, particularly after1990, the farmers in India have been exposedto new challenges. Despite being an importantproducer of rice, cotton, rubber, tea, coffee, juteand spices our agricultural products are notable to compete with the developed countries
because of the highly subsidised agriculture
in those countries.Fig. 4.17:  Tissue culture of teak clonesGenetic engineering is  recognised as a
powerful supplement in inventing newhybrid varieties of seeds.Fig. 4.18:  Problems associated with heavy pesticideuse are widely recognised in developed anddeveloping countriesChange in cropping pattern for example from cereals to high-value crops willmean that India will have to import food. During 1960™s this would have beenseen as a disaster. But if India imports cereals while exporting high-valuecommodities, it will be following successful economies like Italy, Israel and Chile.These countries exports farm products (fruits, olives, speciality seeds and wine)
and import cereals.  Are we ready to take this risk? Debate the issue.Today, Indian agriculture finds itself at thecrossroads. To make agriculture successful andprofitable, proper thrust should be given to theimprovement of the condition of marginal and
small farmers. The green revolution promisedmuch. But today it™s under controversies. It isbeing alleged that it has caused landdegradation due to overuse of chemicals, dryingaquifers and vanishing biodiversity. The
keyword today is ﬁgene revolutionﬂ. Whichincludes genetic engineering.Can you name any gene modified seed usedvastly in India?Infact organic farming is much in voguetoday because it is practised without factorymade chemicals such as fertilisers andpesticides. Hence, it does not affect environmentin a negative manner.A few economists think that Indian farmershave a bleak future if they continue growing
foodgrains on the holdings that grow smallerand smaller as the population rises. India™srural population is about 600 million which
depends upon 250 million (approximate)hectares of agricultural land, an average of lessthan half a hectare per person.Indian farmers should diversify theircropping pattern from cereals to high-value
crops. This will increase incomes and reduceenvironmental degradation simultaneously.Because fruits, medicinal herbs, flowers,vegetables, bio-diesel crops like jatrophaand jojoba need much less irrigation than
rice or sugarcane. India™s diverse climatecan be harnessed to grow a wide range ofhigh-value crops.
