Everything available in our environmentwhich can be used to satisfy our needs,
provided, it is technologically accessible,
economically feasible and culturally
acceptable can be termed as ‚Resource™.The process of transformation of things
available in our environment involves an
inter- dependent relationship betweennature, technology and institutions. Human
beings interact with nature through
technology and create institutions to
accelerate their economic development.Do you think that resources are free giftsof nature as is assumed by many?  They
are not. Resources are a function of humanactivities. Human beings themselves areessential components of resources. They
transform material available in our
environment into resources and use them.
These resources can be classified in the
following waysŒ(a)On the basis of origin Œ biotic and abiotic(b)On the basis of exhaustibility Œ renewable
and non-renewable(c)On the basis of ownership Œ individual,
community, national and international(d)On the basis of status of development Œ
potential, developed stock and reserves.Can you identify and name the various itemsused in making life comfortable in ourvillages and towns. List the items and namethe material used in their making.Fig. 1.1:  Interdependent relationship betweennature, technology and institutionsFig. 1.2:  Classification of resources
2CONTEMPORARY INDIA Œ IITYPES OF RESOURCESOn the Basis of OriginBiotic Resources:  These are obtained frombiosphere and have life such as human beings,flora and fauna, fisheries,  livestock etc.Abiotic Resources: All those things which arecomposed of non-living things are called abioticresources. For example, rocks and metals.On the Basis of ExhaustibilityRenewable Resources: The resourceswhich can be renewed or reproduced byphysical, chemical or mechanical processesare known as renewable or replenishable
resources. For example, solar and windenergy, water, forests and wildlife, etc. Therenewable resource may further be divided
into continuous or flow (Fig.1.2).Non-Renewable Resources: These occur overa very long geological time. Minerals and fossil
fuels are examples of such resources. Theseresources take millions of years in theirformation. Some of the resources like metalsare recyclable and some like fossil fuels cannot
be recycled and get exhausted with their use.On the Basis of OwnershipIndividual Resources: These are also ownedprivately by individuals. Many farmers ownland which is allotted to them by government
against the payment of revenue. In villagesthere are people with land ownership but thereare many who are landless. Urban people ownplots, houses and other property. Plantation,pasture lands, ponds, water in wells etc. are
some of the examples of resources ownershipby individuals. Make a list of resources ownedby your household.Community Owned Resources: There areresources which are accessible to all the
members of the community. Village commons(grazing grounds, burial grounds, villageponds, etc.) public parks, picnic spots,playgrounds in urban areas are de factoaccessible to all the people living there.National Resources: Technically, all theresources belong to the nation. The countryhas legal powers to acquire even privateproperty for public good. You might have seenroads, canals, railways being constructed onfields owned by some individuals. UrbanDevelopment Authorities get empowered by the
government to acquire land. All the minerals,water resources, forests, wildlife, land withinthe political boundaries and oceanic area upto
12 nautical miles (22.2 km) from the coast
termed as territorial water and resourcestherein belong to the nation.International Resources: There areinternational institutions which regulate someresources. The oceanic resources beyond 200nautical miles of the Exclusive Economic Zonebelong to open ocean and no individualcountry can utilise these without theconcurrence of international institutions.Do you know that India has got the right tomine manganese nodules from the bed ofthe Indian Ocean from that area which liesbeyond the exclusive economic zone. Identifysome other resources which are internationalin nature.On the Basis of the Status of DevelopmentPotential Resources: Resources which arefound in a region, but have not been utilised.For example, the western parts of India
particularly Rajasthan and Gujarat have
enormous potential for the development of wind
and solar energy, but so far these have not been
developed properly.Developed Resources: Resources which aresurveyed and their quality and quantity have
been determined for utilisation. Thedevelopment of resources depends ontechnology and level of their feasibility.Stock: Materials in the environment whichhave the potential to satisfy human needs but
human beings do not have the appropriate
technology to access these, are included amongIdentify at least two resources from each
category.
3RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENTstock. For example, water is a compound oftwo inflammable gases; hydrogen and oxygen,which can be used as a rich source of energy.
But we do not have the required technical
‚know-how™ to use them for this purpose.
Hence, it can be considered as stock.Reserves are the subset of the stock, whichcan be put into use with the help of existingtechnical ‚know-how™ but their use has notbeen started. These can be used for meetingfuture requirements. River water can be usedfor generating hydroelectric power butpresently, it is being utilised only to a limited
extent. Thus, the water in the dams, forests etc.is a reserve which can be used in the future.An equitable distribution of resources hasbecome essential for a sustained quality of lifeand global peace. If the present trend of resource
depletion by a few individuals and countriescontinues, the future of our planet is in danger.Therefore, resource planning is essential forsustainable existence of all forms of life.Sustainable existence is a component of
sustainable development.Prepare a list of stock and reserve, resources
that you are familiar with from your local area.DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCESResources are vital for human survival as wellas for maintaining the quality of life. It wasbelieved that resources are free gifts of nature.
As a result, human beings used themindiscriminately and this has led to thefollowing major problems.ŁDepletion of resources for satisfying thegreed of few individuals.ŁAccumulation of resources in few hands, which,
in turn, divided the society into two segmentsi.e. haves  and have nots or rich and poor.ŁIndiscriminate exploitation of resources hasled to global ecological crises such as, globalwarming, ozone layer depletion, environmentalpollution and land degradation.1.Imagine, if the oil supply gets exhausted
one day, how would this affect our life style?2.Plan a survey in your colony/village to
investigate people™s attitude towardsrecycling of the domestic/agricultural
wastes. Ask questions about :(a)What do they think about resourcesthey use?(b)What is their opinion about the
wastes, and its utilisation?(c)Collage your results.Sustainable developmentSustainable economic development means
‚development should take place withoutdamaging the environment, and developmentin the present should not compromise with the
needs of the future generations.™Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states
met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first
International Earth Summit. The Summit wasconvened for addressing urgent problems ofenvironmental protection and socio-economic development at the global level.The assembled leaders signed the
Declaration on Global Climatic Change andBiological Diversity. The Rio Conventionendorsed the global Forest Principles and
adopted Agenda 21 for achievingSustainable Development in the 21st century.Agenda 21It is the declaration signed by world leadersin 1992 at the United Nations Conferenceon Environment and Development (UNCED),which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It
aims at achieving global sustainabledevelopment. It is an agenda to combatenvironmental damage, poverty, diseasethrough global co-operation on common
interests, mutual needs and shared
responsibilities. One major objective of theAgenda 21 is that every local governmentshould draw its own local Agenda 21.RESOURCE PLANNINGPlanning is the widely accepted strategy for
judicious use of resources. It has importance
