Gender, Religion and Caste
39Chapter 4Gender,
Religion and
CasteOverviewIn the previous chapter we noted that the existence of social diversitydoes not threaten democracy. Political expression of social differences

is possible and sometimes quite desirable in a democratic system. Inthis chapter we apply these ideas to the practice of democracy inIndia. We look at three kinds of social differences that can take the
form of social divisions and inequalities. These are social differences
based on gender, religion and caste. In each case we look at the

nature of this division in India and how it gets expressed in politics.We also ask whether different expressions based on these differences
are healthy or otherwise in a democracy.

40Democratic Politics
Gender and politicsLet us begin with gender division. Thisis a form of hierarchical social division

seen everywhere, but is rarely recognised
in the study of politics. The gender

division tends to be understood as naturaland unchangeable. However, it is not
based on biology but on social

expectations and stereotypes.
Public/private divisionBoys and girls are brought up to believethat the main responsibility of women is
housework and bringing up children.
This is reflected in a 
SEXUAL
 DIVISION OFLABOUR in most families: women do allwork inside the home such as cooking,
cleaning, washing clothes, tailoring,
looking after children, etc., and men do
all the work outside the home. It is notthat men cannot do housework; they
simply think that it is for women to
attend to these things. When these jobs

are paid for, men are ready to take up
these works. Most tailors or cooks in

hotels are men. Similarly, it is not that

women do not work outside their home.
In villages, women fetch water, collect
fuel and  work in the fields. In urban
areas, poor women work as domestic
helper in middle class homes, while
middle class women work in offices. In

fact the majority of women do some
sort of paid work in addition to
domestic labour. But their work is not

valued and does not get recognition.The result of this division of labouris that although women constitute half
of the humanity, their role in public life,

especially politics, is minimal in mostsocieties. Earlier, only men were allowed

to participate in public affairs, vote and
contest for public offices. Gradually the

gender issue was raised in politics.

Women in different parts of the world

organised and agitated for equal rights.

There were agitations in different
countries for the extension of voting
rights to women. These agitations
demanded enhancing the political and
legal status of women and improvingA poster from Bengal affirming women™sstrength.Sexual division of labour:
A system in which all work
inside the home is eitherdone by the women of thefamily, or organised by

them through the
domestic helpers.Why not? Ifpolitics is about
power, then
surely maledominance in the
household shouldbe consideredpolitical.Why are we
discussing things
like householdwork in thistextbook on
Political Science?Is this politics?© Zuban
Gender, Religion and Caste
41their educational and careeropportunities. More radical women™s
movements aimed at equality in personaland family life as well. These movementsare called 
FEMINIST movements.
Political expression of gender
division and political mobilisation on thisDiscuss all these perceptions of an ideal woman that prevail in our society. Do you
agree with any of these? If not, what is your image of an ideal woman?Feminist: A womanor a man who
believes in equal rightsand opportunities forwomen and men.© Zubanquestion helped to improve women™s
role in public life. We now find women
working as scientists, doctors, engineers,lawyers, managers and college anduniversity teachers which were earlier notconsidered suitable for women. In some
parts of the world, for example in
42Democratic Politics
Patriarchy: Literally,
rule by father, thisconcept is used to referto a system that valuesmen more and gives
them power over
women.ActivitiesMenW
omenIncome generating work6:002:40
Household and related work0:305:00
Talking, Gossip1:251:20
No work/ Leisure3:403:50
Sleep, self-care, reading etc.12:2511:10
Daily time use (hours: minutes)Source: Government of India, Time Use Survey
, 1998-99.+A ‚time use survey™ was conducted in six states of our country. It
shows that an average woman works every day for a little overseven and half hours while an average man works for six and ahalf hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because
most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do
a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work
is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible.Scandinavian countries such as Sweden,Norway and Finland, the participation
of women in public life is very high.In our country, women still lag much
behind men despite some improvementsince Independence. Ours is still a male-dominated, PATRIARCHAL
 society. Women
face disadvantage, discrimination andoppression in various ways:The literacy rate among women isonly 54 per cent compared with 76 per
cent among men. Similarly, a smaller
You can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household.
Observe all the adult male and female members of your family forone week. Every day note down the number of hours each ofthem spends on the following activities: income generatingactivity (working at the office or shop or factory or field, etc.),household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching
water, looking after children or elders, etc.), reading and
recreation, talking/gossiping, self-care, taking rest or sleeping. Ifnecessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each
activity for a week and calculate the daily average for each activityfor each member. Do women work more in your family as well?

Gender, Religion and Caste
43Mummy alwayssays to outsiders:
ﬁI don™t work. Iam a housewife.ﬂ
But I see her
working non-stopall the time. Ifwhat she does is
not work, whatelse is work?Map not to scaleproportion of girl students go for higherstudies. When we look at school results,

girls perform as well as boys, if not

better in some places. But they drop out

because parents prefer to spend theirresources for their boys™ education rather
than spending equally on their sons and
daughters.
No wonder the proportion ofwomen among the highly paid andvalued jobs is still very small. On an
average an Indian woman works one
hour more than an average man everyday. Yet much of her work is not paid
and therefore often not valued.The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976provides that equal wages should be paidto equal work. However in almost allareas of work, from sports and cinema,
to factories and fields, women are paidless than men, even when both do exactlythe same work.In many parts of India parentsprefer to have sons and find ways tohave the girl child aborted before she isborn. Such sex-selective abortion led toa decline in child sex ratio (number ofgirl children per thousand boys) in the
country to merely 914. As the mapSource: UNFPA, Missing... 
Mapping the Adverse Child Sex Ratio in India
, 2005, p.3.Can you identify your district on this map?What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it
different from others with a different colour?Identify the States where most districts havechild sex ratio below 850.Compare this map with the poster on the nextpage. How do the two of them tell us about thesame issue?CHILD SEX RATIO
BELOW 800
800-849
850-899900-949950 AND ABOVE
DATA  NOT AVAILABLE
DELHINATIONAL AVERAGE 914
(2011 Census)
