Power sharing
1Chapter IPower-sharing
Overview
With this chapter, we resume the tour of democracy that we started
last year. We noted last year that in a democracy all power does not

rest with any one organ of the government. An intelligent sharing ofpower among legislature, executive and judiciary is very important tothe design of a democracy. In this and the next two chapters, we

carry this idea of power-sharing forward. We start with two stories
from Belgium and Sri Lanka. Both these stories are about how
democracies handle demands for power-sharing.The stories yield somegeneral conclusions about the need for power-sharing in democracy.

This allows us to discuss various forms of power-sharing that will be
taken up in the following two chapters.
2Democratic Politics
Belgium and Sri LankaI have a simpleequation in mind.
Sharing power =dividing power =weakening the
country. Why do we

start by talking of
this?Ethnic:  A socialdivision based on
shared culture. People
belonging to the sameethnic group believe in

their common descent
because of similarities
of physical type or of
culture or both. They

need not always have

the same religion or
nationality.
Communitiesand
regions ofBelgiumBelgium is a small country in Europe,smaller in area than the state ofHaryana. It has borders with France,
the Netherlands, Germany and
Luxembourg. It has a population of a
little over one crore, about half the
population of Haryana. The ETHNICcomposition of this small country isvery complex. Of the country™s total
population, 59 per cent lives in the
Flemish region and speaks Dutch
language. Another 40 per cent peoplelive in the Wallonia region and speak
French. Remaining one per cent of the

Belgians speak German. In the capital
city Brussels, 80 per cent people speak
French while 20 per cent are Dutch-
speaking.The minority French-speakingcommunity was relatively rich and
powerful. This was resented by the

Dutch-speaking community who got
the benefit of economic developmentand education much later. This led totensions between the Dutch-speaking
and French-speaking communities
during the 1950s and 1960s. Thetension between the two communities
was more acute in Brussels. Brussels
presented a special problem: the
Dutch-speaking people constituted a
majority in the country, but a
minority in the capital.Let us compare this to thesituation in another country. SriLanka is an island nation, just a few
kilometres off the southern coast of
Tamil Nadu. It has about two crore
people, about the same as in Haryana.
Like other nations in the South Asiaregion, Sri Lanka has a diversepopulation. The major social groupsare the Sinhala-speakers (74 per cent)and the Tamil-speakers (18 per cent).
Among Tamils there are two sub-groups. Tamil natives of the countryWalloon (French-speaking)
Flemish (Dutch-speaking)German-speakingBrussels-Capital Region
Look at the maps of Belgium and Sri Lanka. In which
region, do you find concentration of different
communities?©  Wikipedia
Power sharing
3Majoritarianism: Abelief that the majoritycommunity should be
able to rule a country in
whichever way it wants,

by disregarding the

wishes and needs of the
minority.
are called ‚Sri Lankan Tamils™ (13 per cent).
The rest, whose forefathers came fromIndia as plantation workers duringcolonial period, are called ‚Indian Tamils™.

As you can see from the map,  Sri Lankan
Tamils are concentrated in the north and
east of the country. Most of the Sinhala-

speaking people are Buddhists, while
most of the Tamils are Hindus or
Muslims. There are about 7 per cent

Christians, who are both Tamil
and Sinhala.Just imagine what could happenin situations like this. In Belgium, the
Dutch community could takeadvantage of its numeric majority andforce its will on the French andGerman-speaking population. This
would push the conflict amongcommunities further. This could  lead

to a very messy partition of the
country; both the sides would claimcontrol over Brussels. In Sri Lanka, the
Sinhala community enjoyed an even
bigger majority and could impose its

will on the entire country. Now, let us

look at what happened in both thesecountries.
Majoritarianism in Sri LankaSri Lanka emerged as an independent
country in 1948. The leaders of the
Sinhala community sought to secure
dominance over government by virtue

of their majority. As a result, the
democratically elected government
adopted a series of 
MAJORITARIAN
measures to establish Sinhala supremacy.
In 1956, an Act was passed torecognise Sinhala as the only officiallanguage, thus disregarding Tamil. The
governments followed preferential
policies that favoured Sinhala

applicants for university positions and

government jobs. A new constitution

stipulated that the state shall protect
and foster Buddhism.All these government measures,
coming one after the other, gradually
increased the feeling of alienation
among the Sri Lankan Tamils. They felt

that none of the major political parties

led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders was
sensitive to their language and culture.
They felt that the constitution andgovernment policies denied them equalpolitical rights, discriminated against
them in getting jobs and other
opportunities and ignored their

interests. As a result, the relations
Ethnic Communitiesof Sri LankaSinhaleseSri Lankan Tamil
Indian Tamil
Muslim
4Democratic Politics
What kind of a solution isthis? I am glad ourConstitution does not say
which minister will come from
which community.
Civil war: A violentconflict between
opposing groups within

a country that becomes

so intense that it appears
like a war.
The Belgian leaders took a different
path. They recognised the existence of

regional differences and cultural
diversities. Between 1970 and 1993,
they amended their constitution fourtimes so as to work out an arrangement

that would enable everyone to live

together within the same country. The

arrangement they worked out is

different from any other country and

is very innovative. Here are some of

the elements of the Belgian model: Constitution prescribes that the
number of Dutch and French-speaking
ministers shall be equal in the centralgovernment. Some special laws require
the support of majority of members
from each linguistic group. Thus, no
What™s wrong if
the majority

community
rules? If Sinhalasdon™t rule in Sri

Lanka, whereelse will theyrule?single community can make decisions
unilaterally.
Many powers of the central
government have been given to state
governments of the two regions of the
country. The state governments are not
subordinate to the Central Government.
 Brussels has a separate government
in which both the communities have
equal representation. The French-
speaking people accepted equal
representation in Brussels because the
Dutch-speaking community has
accepted equal representation in the

Central Government.
Accommodation in Belgiumbetween the Sinhala and Tamil
communities strained over time.
The Sri Lankan Tamils launched
parties and struggles for the recognition
of Tamil as an official language, for
regional autonomy and equality of

opportunity in securing education and

jobs. But their demand for more

autonomy to provinces populated by

the Tamils was repeatedly denied. By

1980s several political organisations

were formed demanding an

independent Tamil Eelam (state) in
northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka.
The distrust between the twocommunities turned into widespread
conflict. It soon turned into a 
CIVIL WAR
.As a result thousands of people of boththe communities have been killed. Many
families were forced to leave the country

as refugees and many more lost their
livelihoods. You have read (Chapter 1
of Economics textbook, Class X) aboutSri Lanka™s excellent record of economic
development, education and health. But
the civil war has caused a terrible setback

to the social, cultural and economic lifeof the country.
The photograph here is of a streetaddress in Belgium. You will notice that

place names and directions in twolanguages Œ French and Dutch.©  Wikipedia
Power sharing
5So you are
saying that
sharing of powermakes us more

powerful. Soundsodd! Let methink.Read any newspaper for one week and make clippings of
news related to ongoing conflicts or wars. A group of five
students could pool their clippings together and do the following:Classify these conflicts by their location (your state, India,

outside India).Find out the cause of each of these conflicts. How many of

these are related to power sharing disputes?Which of these conflicts could be resolved by working out power
sharing arrangements?
What do we learn from these two stories
of Belgium and Sri Lanka? Both aredemocracies. Yet, they dealt with the

question of power sharing differently.
In Belgium, the leaders have realised
that the unity of the country is possible

only by respecting the feelings and
interests of different communities and
regions. Such a realisation resulted in

mutually acceptable arrangements for
sharing power. Sri Lanka shows us a

contrasting example. It shows us that
if a majority community wants to force
its dominance over others and refuses

to share power, it can undermine the
unity of the country.
European Union Parliament in BelgiumApart from the Central and
the State Government, there is a
third kind of government. This

‚community government™ is elected by

people belonging to one language
community Œ Dutch, French and

German-speaking Œ no matter where

they live. This government has the

power regarding cultural, educational

and language-related issues.
You might find the Belgian model
very complicated. It indeed is very

complicated, even for people living in
Belgium. But these arrangements have

worked well so far. They helped to

avoid civic strife between the two

major communities and a possible

division of the country on linguistic

lines. When many countries of Europe

came together to form the European
Union, Brussels was chosen as its

headquarters.

6Democratic Politics
Annette studies in a Dutch medium school in thenorthern region of Belgium. Many French-speaking students in
her school want the medium of instruction to be French. Selvi
studies in a school in the northern region of Sri Lanka. All the
students in her school are Tamil-speaking and they want the
medium of instruction to be Tamil.
If the parents of Annette and Selvi were to approachrespective governments to realise the desire of the child
who is more likely to succeed? And why?
Why power sharing is desirable?
Thus, two different sets of reasons canbe given in favour of power sharing.
Firstly, power sharing is good because
it helps to reduce the possibility of
conflict between social groups. Since
social conflict often leads to violence

and political instability, power sharing
is a good way to ensure the stability of

political order. Imposing the will of

majority community over others may

look like an attractive option in the

short run, but in the long run it

undermines the unity of the nation.
Tyranny of the majority is not just
oppressive for the minority; it often

brings ruin to the majority as well.
There is a second, deeper reasonwhy power sharing is good for
democracies. Power sharing is the veryspirit of democracy. A democratic rule

involves sharing power with those

affected by its exercise, and who have

to live with its effects. People have a

right to be consulted on how they are

to be governed. A legitimate
government is one where citizens,
through participation, acquire a stake

in the system.Let us call the first set of reasonsPRUDENTIAL
 and the second moral. While
prudential reasons stress that powersharing will bring out better outcomes,
moral reasons emphasise the very act

of power sharing as valuable.
Prudential: Based onprudence, or on careful
calculation of gains and
losses. Prudential decisions
are usually contrasted with
decisions based purely on
moral considerations.
The cartoon at the left refers to the
problems of running the Germany™s grand

coalition government that includes the twomajor parties of the country, namely the
Christian Democratic Union and the
Social Democratic Party. The two parties

are historically rivals to each other. They

had to form a coalition governmentbecause neither of them got clear majority
of seats on their own in the 2005

elections. They take divergent positions

on several policy matters, but still jointly
run the government.©  Tab -
 The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Power sharing
7As usual, Vikram was driving the motorbike under a vow ofsilence and Vetal was the pillion rider.  As usual, Vetal
started telling Vikram a story to keep him awake whiledriving. This time the story went as follows:ﬁIn the city of Beirut there lived a man called Khalil. His parents camefrom different communities.  His father was an Orthodox Christian and mother a Sunni
Muslim. This was not so uncommon in this modern, cosmopolitan city. People from

various communities that lived in Lebanon came to live in its capital, Beirut. They lived
together, intermingled, yet fought a bitter civil war among themselves. One of Khalil™s

uncles was killed in that war.
At the end of this civil war, Lebanon™s leaders came together and agreed to some basic
rules for power sharing among different communities. As per these rules, the country™s
President must belong to the Maronite sect of Catholic Christians. The Prime Minister must
be from the Sunni Muslim community. The post of Deputy Prime Minister is fixed for

Orthodox Christian sect and that of the Speaker for Shi™a Muslims. Under this pact, the
Christians agreed not to seek French protection and the Muslims agreed not to seek
unification with the neighbouring state of Syria.When the Christians and Muslims came to
this agreement, they were nearly equal in population. Both sides have continued to
respect this agreement though now the Muslims are in clear majority.
Khalil does not like this system one bit. He is a popular man with political ambition. Butunder the present system the top position is out of his reach. He does not practiseeither his father™s or his mother™s religion and does not wish to be known by either. He

cannot understand why Lebanon can™t be like any other ‚normal™ democracy. ﬁJust hold

an election, allow everyone to contest and whoever wins maximum votes becomes the
president, no matter which community he comes from. Why can™t we do that, like in
other democracies of the world?ﬂ he asks. His elders, who have seen the bloodshed of
the civil war, tell him that the present system is the best guarantee for peace–ﬂ
The story was not finished, but they had reached the TV towerwhere they stopped every day. Vetal wrapped up quickly

and posed his customary question to Vikram: ﬁIf
you had the power to rewrite the rules in
Lebanon, what would you do? Would you

adopt the ‚regular™ rules followed
everywhere, as Khalil suggests? Or stick to
the old rules? Or do something else?ﬂ Vetal

did not forget to remind Vikram of their basic
pact: ﬁIf you have an answer in mind and yet
do not speak up, your mobike will freeze, and
so will you!ﬂ
Can you help poor Vikram in answering Vetal?Khalil™sdilemma
