Production of goods in large quantities afterprocessing from raw materials to morevaluable products is called manufacturing. Doyou know that paper is manufactured fromwood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steelfrom iron ore and aluminium from bauxite?
Do you also know that some types of clothesare manufactured from yarn which itself is anindustrial product?People employed in the secondary activitiesmanufacture the primary materials into
finished goods. The workers employed in steelfactories, car, breweries, textile industries,bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people
are employed in providing services. In thischapter, we are mainly concerned withmanufacturing industries which fall in thesecondary sector.The economic strength of a country ismeasured by the development ofmanufacturing industries.IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURINGManufacturing sector is considered the backbone
of development in general and economicdevelopment in particular mainly becauseŒŁManufacturing industries not only help inmodernising agriculture, which forms thebackbone of our economy, they also reducethe heavy dependence of people onagricultural income by providing them jobsin secondary and tertiary sectors.ŁIndustrial development is a precondition foreradication of unemployment and povertyfrom our country. This was the mainphilosophy behind public sector industriesand joint sector ventures in India. It was also
aimed at bringing down regional disparitiesby establishing industries in tribal andbackward areas.ŁExport of manufactured goods expands
trade and commerce, and brings in much
needed foreign exchange.ŁCountries that transform their raw
materials into a wide variety of furnishedgoods of higher value are prosperous.India™s prosperity lies in increasing and
diversifying its manufacturing industries asquickly as possible.Agriculture and industry are not exclusiveof each other. They move hand in hand.  Forinstance, the agro-industries in India have givena major boost to agriculture by raising itsproductivity. They depend on the latter for rawmaterials and sell their products such asirrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides,pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines and
tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, development andcompetitiveness of manufacturing industry hasnot only assisted agriculturists in increasingOn the occassion of Diwali, Harish went toa market with his parents. They purchasedshoes and clothes for him. His mother
purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas(earthen lamps). Harish observed that the
shops in the market were flooded withitems for sale. He wondered how so manyitems could be made in such large
quantities. His father explained that shoes,clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured bymachines in large industries, some utensilsare manufactured in small industries, whileitems like diyas are made by individualartisans in household industry.Do you have some ideas about theseindustries?
