Social ScienceIndia and the Contemporary World Œ II
Textbook in History for Class X

First EditionMarch 2007  Chaitra 1928ReprintedJanuary 2008 Pausa 1929
January 2009 Magha 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932January 2012 Magha 1933
November 2012 Kartika 1934
November 2013 Kartika 1935PD 480T MJ©National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007````` 105.00Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermarkPublished at the Publication Division by theSecretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,

New Delhi 110 016 and printed at S.P.A.

Printers (P) Ltd., B-17/3, Okhla Industrial
Area, Phase II, New Delhi 110 020ISBN 81-7450-707-8ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher™s consent, in anyform of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revisedprice indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrectand should be unacceptable.Publication TeamHead, Publication:
Ashok SrivastavaDivisionChief Production:
Shiv KumarOfficer
Chief Business:
Gautam GangulyManager
Chief Editor:
Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)
Editorial Assistant:
Mathew JohnProduction Officer:
Arun ChitkaraCover and LayoutParthiv Shah assisted by Shraboni Royand Shivraj PatraCartographyK. Varghese
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERTNCERT CampusSri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III StageBengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan

Ahmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454
CWC ComplexMaligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869
Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 recommends that children™s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks adeparture from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our systemand causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooksdeveloped on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea.They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundariesbetween different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantlyfurther in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the NationalPolicy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teacherswill take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursueimaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examinationis one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar
so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves
for making children™s life at school a ha
ppy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden byrestructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration forchild psychology and the time available 
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation
and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-onexperience.NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committeeresponsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the Advisory Groupon Social Science, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book,

Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya for guiding the  work of this committee. Severalteachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to theirprincipals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and HigherEducation, Ministry of Human Resource Development under theChairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G. P. Deshpande, fortheir valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERTwelcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake furtherrevision and refinement.DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of Educational
20 November 2006
Research and Trainingiv
Textbook Development Committee
Brij Tankha, Professor, Department of East Asian Studies, University of Delhi(Chapter II)G. Balachandran, Professor, Graduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva(Chapter IV)Janaki Nair, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata (Chapter VI)Monica Juneja, Professor, Maria-Goeppert-Mayer Guest Professor, HistorischesSeminar, University of Hanover, Germany (Chapter I)
P.K. Dutta, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata (Chapter VIII)Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Hoshangabad
Rekha Krishnan, Head of Senior School, Vasant Valley School, New DelhiSekhar Bandyopadhyay,  Professor, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand (Chapter III)Shukla Sanyal, Reader, Department of History, Calcutta University, Kolkata (Chapter I)Tanika Sarkar, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University,New Delhi (Chapter VII)
Udaya Kumar, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata (Chapter VIII)
MEMBER-COORDINATORKiran Devendra, Professor, Department of Elementary Education, NCERT,New DelhiCHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE FORTHE SECONDARY
 STAGE
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, Calcutta University, KolkataCHIEF ADVISORNeeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, School of SocialSciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Chapter V)Members

This book is the result of a collective effort of a large number of historians, teachers andeducationists. Each chapter has been written, discussed and revised over many months. We
would like to acknowledge all those who have participated in these discussions.
A large number of people have read chapters of the book and provided support. Wethank in particular the members of the Monitoring Committee who commented on anearlier draft; Kumkum Roy suggested many changes in the text; G. Arunima, Gautam
Bhadra, Supriya Chaudhuri, Jayanti Chattopadhyay,  Sangeetha Raj, Sambuddha Sen,Lakshmi Subramaniam, A.R. Venkatachalapathy, T.R. Ramesh Bairy, C.S. Venkiteswaranand Sahana  helped with Chapter VIII. Purushottam Agarwal helped write the sectionson the Hindi novel.  Ngun Quoc Anh translated Vietnamese texts for Chapter III.Illustrating the book would have been impossible without the help of many institutionsand individuals: the Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division; RabindraBhawan Photo Archives, Viswabharati University, Shantiniketan; Photo Archives,American Embassy, New Delhi;  Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts,
New Delhi; National  Manuscript Mission Library,  New Delhi; Centre for Studies in
Social Sciences, Kolkata; Ashutosh Collection of the National Library, Kolkata;
Roja Muthaiah Research Library Trust, Chennai; India Collection, India International

Centre; Archives of Indian Labour, V.V. Giri National Institute of Labour, New Delhi;
Photo Archives, University of West Indies, Trinidad. Jyotindra and Juta Jain allowedgenerous access to their vast collection of visual images now stored at the CIVIC Archives;
Parthiv Shah provided several photographs from his collection. Prabhu Mohapatrasupplied visuals of indentured labourers;  Muzaffar Alam procured material from theLibrary of Chicago; Pratik Chakrabarty scanned images from the Kent UniversityLibrary; Anish Vanaik and Parth Shil did photo research in New Delhi.Shalini Advani did many rounds of editing with care and ensured that the texts wereaccessible to children. Shyama Warner™s sharp eye picked up innumerable slips and lapses
in the text. We thank them both for their total involvement in the project.We have made every effort to acknowledge credits , but we apologise in advance for anyomission that may have inadvertently taken place.Acknowledgements

Credits
 Photographs and picturesWe would like to acknowledge the following:
Institutions and Photo ArchivesArchives of Indian Labour, V.V. Giri National Institute of Labour (V: 18, 19)
Ashutosh Collection of the National Library, Kolkata
Collection Jyotindra  and Juta Jain, Civic Archives (III: 11, 13, 14; V: 25, 26a,
26b, 27; VII: 17)

Library of Congress Prints and Photography Division (IV: 20; VII: 40)
Manuscript Mission Collection (VII: 14, 15, 16)Photo Archive, American Library, New Delhi (IV: 21, 23)

Photo Archives, University of West Indies, Trinidad (IV: 14, 15, 16)

Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (images for
Chapter III photographs)Roja Muthaiah Research Library Trust, ChennaiSahitya Akademi, Kolkata (many images for Chapter VIII)JournalsThe Illustrated London News (IV: 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13; V: 4, 5, 6, 8, 12; VI: 2,7, 9, 10, 11, 12)Illustrated Times (V: 12)Indian Charivari (VII: 18)Graphic: (IV: 13)BooksBreman, Jan and Parthiv Shah, 
Working the Mill No More
 (V: 21)
Chaudhuri, K.N., 
Trade and Civilization in the Indian Ocean
 (map in Chapter IV)
Dwivedi, Sharda and Rahul Mehrotra, 
Bombay: The City Within 
(III: 1; VI: 16, 18, 22)
Evenson, Norma,
 The Indian Metropolis: A View Toward the West
 (VI: 19, 20, 21, 23)
Goswami, B.N., 
The Word is Sacred; Sacred is the Word
 (VII: 14, 15, 16)
Hall, Peter, 
Cities of Tomorrow
: An Intellectual History of Urban Planning and Design in the Twentieth
Century 
(VI: 6)Harvey, David, 
Paris: Capital of Modernity 
(VI: 15)
Jones, G.S., 
Outcast London: A Study in the Relationship between Classes in Victorian Society
 (VI: 13)Karnow, Stanley, 
Vietnam: A History
 (III: 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20)
Ruhe, Peter, Gandhi (III: 2, 3, 5, 8)Sennett, Richard, 
Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City in Western Civilisation
 (VI: 1, 14)
The Golden Shoe: Building Singapore™s Financial District 
(VI: 24)

Introduction
We live in a world where the existence of nations is taken for granted. We see people asbelonging to nations and having a nationality, and we assume that this sense of belonging
has existed from time immemorial. We consider countries as the same as nations, and usethe two terms as synonyms, making little distinction between them. We think of countriesas unified entities, each with a demarcated international boundary, a defined territory, a
national language, and a central government.Yet if we were to travel in a time capsule to the mid-eighteenth century and look fornations as we know them today, we would not find them. If we were to ask people
about their nationality, about their national identity, they would not understand our
questions. For at that time, nations did not exist in their modern form. People lived
within kingdoms, small states, principalities, chiefdoms and duchies, not within nations.
As Eric Hobsbawm, a famous historian, once said, the most remarkable fact about the
modern nation is its modernity. The history of its existence is no more than 250 yearsold.How did the modern nation come into being? How did people begin to see themselvesas belonging to a nation?The sense of belonging to a nation developed only over a period of time. The first threechapters (in Section I) of this book will trace this history. You will see how the idea of
nationalism emerged in Europe, how territories were unified, and national governments
formed. It was a process that took many decades, involved many wars and revolutions,
many ideological battles and political conflicts. From a discussion of Europe (Chapter I)
we will shift our focus to the growth of nationalism in Indo-China and India. In both
these regions, nationalism was shaped by the experience of colonialism and the anti-
imperialist movement. But the national movements in these countries took on forms
that were also widely different. Chapters II and III will help you understand how
nationalism in colonial countries can develop in a variety  of ways, glorify contrastingideals, and be  linked to different modes of struggle.The story of nationalism in these chapters will move at several levels. You will of courseread about great leaders like Giuseppe Mazzini, Ho Chi Minh and Mahatma Gandhi.
But we cannot understand nationalism only by knowing about the words and deeds of
important leaders, and the big and dramatic events they led and participated in. We have
to also look at the aspirations and activities of ordinary people, see how nationalism is
expressed in small events of everyday life, and shaped by a variety of seemingly dissimilar
and unrelated social movements.  To understand how nationalism spreads, we need to
know not only what the leaders said, but also how their words were understood and
interpreted by people. If we are to think about how people begin to identify with a
nation, we must see not only the political events that are critical to the process, but also
how nationalist sensibilities are nurtured by artists and writers, and through art and
literature, songs and tales.In Section II, we will shift our focus to economies and livelihoods. Last year you readabout those social groups Œ pastoralists, forest dwellers and peasants Œ who are often
seen as survivors from past times when in fact they are very much part of the modern
world we live in. This year we will focus on developments that are seen as symbolising
modernity Œ globalisation, industrialisation, urbanisation Œ and see the many sidesof the history of these developments.In Chapter IV you will see how the global world has emerged out of a long andcomplicated history. From ancient times, pilgrims, traders, travelers have traverseddistances, carrying goods, information and skills, linking societies in ways that often
had contradictory consequences. Items of food and species of plants spread from
one region to another, transferring information and taste, as well as disease anddeath. As Western powers carried the flag of ‚civilisation™ deep into different parts
of Africa, precious metals and slaves were taken away to Europe and America. When
coffee and sugar were grown in the Caribbean plantations for the world market, an
oppressive system of indentured labour came into being in India and China to supply
workers for the plantations.Chapter VI similarly will look at the many sides of the development of cities as theyhave come up in different parts of the world. Enchanted by the growth of cities,
visitors to big cities could often see only the bridges and buildings, the roads and
new modes of transport, and the array of glittering shops selling diverse goods.
Cities seem to be places where trade and industries expand, people come in search of
work and opportunities of employment open up. While looking at this history of
growth, however, we should not forget the lives of those who do not find any job,
or those who survive by vending and hawking on the streets, living in makeshift
shelters or crowded tenements.  Chapter VI tries to capture the many contrasting
experiences of the city.Section III will introduce you to the histories of print culture and the novel.Surrounded by things that appear in print, we might find it difficult today to imagine
a time when printing was still unknown. Chapter VII will trace how the history of
the contemporary world is intimately connected with the growth of print. You willsee how printing made possible the spread of information and ideas, debates and
discussions, advertising and propaganda, and a variety of new forms of literature.
The novel, for instance, could become popular only because it could be printed and
sold in large numbers. As novels were widely read, they began to influence the
minds of people, shape identities and behaviour, and became connected to the culture
and politics of the time. We often do not realise how our attitudes to the world are
moulded by the literature we read.When we discuss such themes of everyday life, we begin to see how history can helpus reflect on even the seemingly ordinary things in the world.Like the history book you read last year, India and the Contemporary World II, haseight chapters divided into three sections. You are required to read only five chapters:two each from Sections I and II, and one from Section III.NEELADRI BHATTACHARYAChief Advisor Œ Historyx
Contents
xiSection I: Events and ProcessesI.The Rise of Nationalism in Europe3
II.The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China29
III.Nationalism in India53
Section II: Livelihoods, Economies and SocietiesIV.The Making of a Global World77
V.The Age of Industrialisation103
VI.Work, Life and Leisure127
Section III: Everyday Life, Culture and PoliticsVII.Print Culture and the Modern World153
VIII.Novels, Society and History177
Forewordiii
Introductionix

