Political Parties71Chapter 6OverviewIn this tour of democracy, we have come across political parties severaltimes. In Class IX, we noticed the role of political parties in the rise ofdemocracies, in the formation of constitutional designs, in electoralpolitics and in the making and working of governments. In thistextbook, we have glanced at political parties as vehicles of federalsharing of political power and as negotiators of social divisions inthe arena of democratic politics. Before concluding this tour, let ustake a close look at the nature and working of political parties,especially in our country. We begin by asking two common questions:Why do we need parties? How many parties are good for a democracy?
In the light of these, we introduce the national and regional politicalparties in today™s India and then look at what is wrong with political
parties and what can be done about it.Political Parties
72Democratic PoliticsWhy do we need political parties?Political parties are easily one of the mostvisible institutions in a democracy.
 Formost ordinary citizens, democracy is equalto political parties. If you trav
el to remoteparts of our country and speak to the
less educated citizens, you could come
across people who may not know
anything about our Constitution or about
the nature of our government. But
chances are that they would know
something about our political parties. 
Atthe same time this visibility does not mean
popularity. Most people tend to be verycritical of political parties. T
hey tend toblame parties for all that is wrong with
our democracy and our political life.
Parties have become identified with
social and political divisions.Therefore, it is natural to askŒdowe need political parties at all? About
hundred years ago there were few
countries of the world that had any
political party. Now there are few thatdo not have parties. Wh
y did politicalparties become so omnipresent in
democracies all over the world? Let us
first answer what political parties are and
what they do, before we say why we needthem.MeaningA political party is a group of peoplewho come together to contest elections
and hold power in the government. They
agree on some policies and programmes
for the society with a view to promote
the collective good. Since there can be
different views on what is good for all,So, you agreewith me. Parties
are partial,
partisan and lead
to partitions.
Parties do
nothing but
divide people.
That is their real
function!Election Commission has officially banned wallwriting by parties during election times. Most
political parties argue that was the cheapest way for
their campaign. These election times used to
create amazing graffiti on the walls. Here are someexamples from Tamil Nadu.(1)(2)(3)(4)© (1) M Govarthan (2) A Muralidharan (3) M Moorthy (4) T Singaravelou, The Hindu
Political Parties73Partisan: A personwho is stronglycommitted to a party,group or faction.
Partisanship is marked
by a tendency to take a
side and inability to take
a balanced view on an
issue.© RK Laxman - Brushing up the yearsparties try to persuade people why theirpolicies are better than others. T
hey seekto implement these policies by winningpopular support through elections.Thus, parties reflect fundamentalpolitical divisions in a society. Parties areabout a part of the society and thus
involve PARTISANSHIP. T
hus a party isknown by which part it stands for, whichpolicies it supports and whose interests
it upholds. 
A political party has threecomponents:
lthe leaders,lthe active members andlthe followersFunctionsWhat does a political party do? Basically,
political parties fill political offices andex
ercise political power. Parties do soby performing a series of functions:1Parties contest elections. In mostdemocracies, elections are fought mainlyamong the candidates put up by politicalparties. Parties select their candidates indifferent ways. In some countries, suchas the USA, members and supportersof a party choose its candidates. Nowmore and more countries are following
this method. In other countries like India,
top party leaders choose candidates forcontesting elections.2Parties put forward differentpolicies and programmes and thevoters choose from them. Each of usmay have different opinions and viewson what policies are suitable for thesociety. But no gov
ernment can handlesuch a large variety of views. In ademocracy,
 a large number of similaropinions have to be grouped together
to provide a direction in which policiescan be formulated by the gov
ernments.This is what the parties do. 
A partyreduces a vast multitude of opinions into
74Democratic PoliticsOkay, grantedthat we can™t livewithout political
parties. But tell
me on what
grounds do
people support a
political party?a few basic positions which it supports.A government is expected to baseits policies on the line taken by the
RULING PARTY.3Parties play a decisive role in makinglaws for a country.
 Formally,
 laws aredebated and passed in the legislature. But
since most of the members belong to a
party, they go by the direction of theparty leadership, irrespective of theirpersonal opinions.4Parties form and run gov
ernments.As we noted last year, the big policy
decisions are taken by political executive
that comes from the political parties.Parties recruit leaders, train them and then
make them ministers to run the
government in the way they want.5Those parties that lose in the electionsplay the role of opposition to the partiesin power, by voicing different views and
criticising government for its failures or
wrong policies. Opposition parties alsomobilise opposition to the government.6Parties shape public opinion. Theyraise and highlight issues. Parties have
lakhs of members and activists spread
all over the country.
 Many of the pressuregroups are the extensions of political
parties among different sections of
society. Parties sometimes also launchmovements for the resolution of
problems faced by people. Often
opinions in the society crystallise on the
lines parties take.7Parties provide people access togov
ernment machinery and welfareschemes implemented by gov
ernments.For an ordinary citizen it is easy toapproach a local party leader than a
gov
ernment officer. T
hat is why,
 they feelclose to parties even when they do not
fully trust them.  Parties have to beresponsive to people™s needs anddemands. Otherwise people can rejectthose parties in the next elections.NecessityThis list of functions in a sense answersthe question asked above: we need
political parties because they perform allthese functions. But we still need to askwhy modern democracies cannot exist
without political parties.  We canunderstand the necessity of political
parties by imagining a situation without
parties. Every candidate in the electionswill be independent. So no one will be
able to make any promises to the people
about any major policy changes. T
hegov
ernment may be formed, but itsutility will remain ever uncertain. Elected
representatives will be accountable to their
constituency for what they do in the
locality. But no one will be responsiblefor how the country will be run.We can also think about it by lookingat the non-party based elections to the
panchaya
t in many states. 
Although, theparties do not contest formally,
 it isgenerally noticed that the village gets split
into more than one faction, each of
which puts up a ‚panel™ of its candidates.This is exactly what the party does. T
hatis the reason we find political parties in
almost all countries of the world,
whether these countries are big or small,
old or new,
 developed or developing.The rise of political parties is directlylinked to the emergence of
re
presentative democracies. 
As we have
seen, large societies need representativedemocracy.
  As societies became large
and complex, they also needed some
agency to gather different views on
various issues and to present these to
the government. They neededRuling Party: Politicalparty that runsgovernment.
Political Parties75some ways, to bring variousrepresentatives together so that aresponsible government could be
formed. They needed a mechanism
to support or restrain the
government, make policies, justify orCategorise these photographs by the functions of political parties theyillustrate. Find one photograph or news clipping from your own area foreach of the functions listed above.oppose them. Political parties fulfillthese needs that every representative
government has. We can say that
parties are a necessary condition for
a democracy.How many parties should we have?In a democracy any group of citizens isfree to form a political party.  In thisformal sense, there are a large numberof political parties in each country.
 Morethan 750 parties are registered with theElection Commission of India. But notall these parties are serious contenders inthe elections. Usually only a handful ofparties are effectively in the race to winelections and form the gov
ernment. Sothe question, then is: how many major
or effective parties are good for a
democracy?In some countries, only one party isallowed to control and run the government.
These are called one-party systems.1:Activists of BJP Mahila Morcha demonstrate against hike in prices of onions and LPG inVisakhapatnam.2:Minister distributes Rs One lakh cheque to the families of hooch victims at their houses.3:Activists of CPI (M), CPI, OGP and JD (S) take out a rally in Bhubaneswar to protest against
POSCO, the Korean steel company for being permitted by the State Government to export ironore from Orissa to feed steel plants in China and Korea.© (1) C V Subrahmanyan (2) K Gopinathan(3) A Chakrabarty, The Hindu132
76Democratic PoliticsWhat did Kishenji mean by an alternative political formation?  Thequestion came up in a conversation between Sudha, Karuna,Shaheen and Gracy. All four women had led very powerful people™smovements in different parts of the country. They were meeting ina village in Orissa, away from their day-to-day struggles, to think afresh the future ofpeople™s movements.The discussion naturally turned to Kishenji, who was regarded as a friend, politicalphilosopher  and moral guide by all the movement groups in the country. He had arguedthat people™s movement should embrace politics openly. His argument was simple yetpowerful. Movements focused on a single issue are suitable as long as we wish to achieve
limited changes in a particular aspect of life. But if we wish to bring about a fundamental
social transformation, or basic change even in one aspect of life, we would need a political
organisation. People™s movement must establish a new political formation to act as a moral
force in politics. This was an urgent task, he said, because all the existing political partieshad become irrelevant for social transformation.ﬁBut Kishenji never clarified what that organisation will be. He talked of an alternativepolitical formation or a third force in politics. But did he mean a political party?ﬂ saidGracy. She felt that an old style political party was not the right instrument for socialchange.Sudha agreed with her. ﬁI have thought about it several times. I agree that all thestruggles that we are involved with Œ the struggle against displacement, againstglobalisation, against caste and gender oppression and for an alternative kind of
development Œ all this is political. But the moment we form a party, all the goodwill wehave earned all these years will be lost. People will think of us as no different from other
politicians.ﬂﬁBesidesﬂ, added Karuna, ﬁwe have seen that a lotcan be achieved by putting pressure on the
existing political parties. We tried putting upcandidates in panchayat elections, but the results
were not very encouraging. People respect our
work, they even adore us, but when it comes to
voting they go for the established politicalparties.ﬂShaheen did not agree with them: ﬁLet us be veryclear. Kishenji wanted all the people™s movementsto forge a new political party. Of course hewanted this party to be a different kind of a party.
He was not for political alternatives, but for analternative kind of politics.ﬂKishenji is no more. What would be youradvice to these four activists? Should they
form a new political party? Can a political
party become a moral force in politics? What
should that party be like?politics?A moral force in© Zuban
