Challenges to Democracy101Chapter 8Challenges toDemocracy
OverviewThis concluding chapter draws upon all that you have learnt in thelast two years so as to address the fundamental questions of
democratic politics : What are the challenges that democracy faces
in our country and elsewhere? What can be done to reform democraticpolitics? How can our democracy become more democratic in its
practice and outcomes? This chapter does not answer these
questions. It only makes some suggestions about the way in which
we can approach the questions of challenges and reforms. It invitesyou to think on your own and come up with your own reading of
the challenges, your recipe of how to overcome these and your own
definition of democracy.

102Democratic Politics
Thinking about challengesDo you remember the first chapter of your Political
Science textbook of Class IX?  There we tracked the
expansion of democracy all over the world in the last
hundred years. Our reading thereafter has confirmed

our initial impression: democracy is the dominant form
of government in the contemporary world. It does
not face a serious challenger or rival. Yet our exploration

of the various dimensions of democratic politics has
shown us something else as well. The promise of
democracy is far from realised anywhere in the world.
Democracy does not have a challenger, but that does
not mean that it does not face any challenges.
At different points in this tour of democracy, we
have noted the serious challenges that democracy facesall over the world. A challenge is not just any problem.
We usually call only those difficulties a ‚challenge™ which

are significant and which can be overcome. A challenge
is a difficulty that carries within it an opportunity for
progress. Once we overcome a challenge we go up to

a higher level than before.Different countries face different kinds ofchallenges. Can you recall the map of democratic

governments in the year 2000 that was included in your
textbook? At least one fourth of the globe is still not
under democratic government. The challenge for
democracy in these parts of the world is very stark.These countries face the foundational challenge ofmaking the transition to democracy and then institutingdemocratic government. This involves bringing down
the existing non-democratic regime, keeping military
away from controlling government and establishing asovereign and functional state.Most of the established democracies face thechallenge of expansion. This involves applying thebasic principle of democratic government across all
the regions, different social groups and various
institutions. Ensuring greater power to local

governments, extension of federal principle to all the
units of the federation, inclusion of women andminority groups, etc., falls under this challenge. This
also means that less and less decisions should remain
outside the arena of democratic control. Most
countries including India and other democracies like
the US face this challenge.The third challenge of deepening of democracyis faced by every democracy in one form or another.

This involves strengthening of the institutions and
practices of democracy. This should happen in such a

way that people can realise their expectations of
democracy. But ordinary people have different

expectations from democracy in different societies.

Therefore, this challenge takes different meanings andpaths in different parts of the world. In general terms,
it usually means strengthening those institutionsthat help people™s participation and control.
This requires an attempt to bring down thecontrol and influence of the rich andpowerful people in making governmentaldecision.We have noted or hinted at these
challenges in all the various examples and
stories that we studied in our textbook ofClass IX and in the earlier chapters of thisbook. Let us go back to all the major stopsin our tour of democracy, refresh our
memory and note down the challengesthat democracy faces in each of these.
Challenges to Democracy103Different contexts, different challenges
Each of these cartoons represents a challenge to democracy. Please describe what that challenge is. Also place it
in one of the three categories mentioned in the first section.Mubarak Re-electedSeeing the democracy
Liberal Gender EqualityCampaign Money© Patrick Chappatte - Cagle Cartoons Inc.© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Tab - 
The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
© Ares - 
Best Latin America
, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
104Democratic Politics
Case and contextYour description of the challenges for democracy in thatsituationChile: General Pinochet™s[Example] Establishing civilian control over all governmental
government defeated, butinstitutions, holding the first multi-party elections, recalling all
military still in control ofpolitical leaders from exile.many institutionsPoland: After the firstsuccess of Solidarity, the
government imposedmartial law and bannedsolidarityGhana: Just attainedindependence, Nkrumahelected presidentMyanmar: Suu Kyi under
house arrest for more than15 years, army rulers
getting global acceptanceInternationalorganisations:
US as the only superpower disregards the UNand takes unilateral actionMexico: Second freeelection after the defeatof PRI in 2000; defeatedcandidate alleges riggingChina: Communist Partyadopts economic reformsbut maintains monopolyover political powerPakistan: GeneralMusharraf holdsreferendum, allegations
of fraud in voters™ listIraq: Widespreadsectarian violence as thenew government fails toestablish its authoritySouth Africa: Mandelaretires from active politics,pressure on his successorMbeki to withdraw someconcessions given toWhite minority
Challenges to Democracy105US, Guantanamo Bay:UN Secretary Generalcalls this a violation ofinternational law,
US refused to respondSaudi Arabia:  Women not
allowed to take part inpublic activities,no freedom of religion forminoritiesYugoslavia: Ethnictension between Serbsand Albanians on the rise
in the province of Kosovo.Yugoslavia disintergrated
Belgium: One round ofconstitutional changetaken place, but the Dutchspeakers not satisfied;
they want more autonomySri Lanka: The peace talksbetween the governmentand the LTTE break
down, renewed violenceUS, Civil Rights: Blackshave won equal rights, butare still poor, less
educated and marginalisedNorthern Ireland: Thecivil war has ended butCatholics and Protestantsyet to develop trustNepal: ConstituentAssembly about to be
elected, unrest inTerai areas, Maoists have
not surrendered armsBolivia: Morales, asupporter of water struggle,
becomes Prime Minister,

MNCs threaten to leavethe countryCase and contextYour description of the challenges for democracy in thatsituation
106Democratic Politics
Different types of challengesNow that you have noted down all these challenges, let us group these together into some broad categories.
Given below are some spheres or sites of democratic politics. You may place against each of these the specific

challenges that you noted for one or more countries or cartoons in the previous section. In addition to that write
one item for India for each of these spheres. In case you find that some challenges do not fit into any of the

categories given below, you can crea
te new categories and put some items under that.
ConstitutionaldesignDemocraticrightsWorking of
institutionsElections
Federalism,decentralisationAccommodationof diversityPoliticalorganisationsAny other categoryAny other category
Challenges to Democracy107Let us group these again, this time by the nature of these c
hallenges as per the classification suggested in the first
section. For each of these categories, find at least one example from India as well.
FoundationalchallengeChallenge ofexpansionChallenge ofdeepeningNow let us think only about India. Think of all the challenges that democracy faces in contemporary India. Listthose five that should be addressed first of all. T
he listing should be in order of priority, i.e, the challenge you
find most important or pressing should be mentioned at number 1, and so on. Give one example of that
challenge and your reasons for assigning it the priority.
PriorityChallenges toExampleReasons for preferencedemocracy1.2.3.4.5.
108Democratic Politics
Thinking about political reformsEach of these challenges is linked to the possibilityof reforms. As mentioned above, we discuss

challenges only because we think these can be
overcome. Generally all the suggestions or proposals

about overcoming various challenges to democracyare called ‚democracy reform™ or ‚political reform™.

We are not going to give here a list of desirable

political reforms, for there cannot be any such list. If

all the countries do not have the same challenges, it
follows that everyone cannot follow the same recipe
of political reforms. We cannot prescribe a procedure

for car repair without knowing which model the car
is, what the defect is and what tools are available,
where the car has broken down, etc.
Can we at least have a list of such reforms for our
country in today™s context? We can develop some
proposals for reforms at the national level. But the

real challenge of reforms may not lie at the national

level. Some of the crucial questions need to be thought
at the State or local level. Besides, such a list may
become irrelevant after some time. So, instead of that

let us think of some broad guidelines that can be kept
in mind while devising ways and means for political
reforms in India:
It is very tempting to think of legal ways ofreforming politics, to think of new laws to ban
undesirable things. But this temptation needs to be

resisted. No doubt, law has an important role to play
in political reform. Carefully devised changes in law
can help to discourage wrong political practices and
encourage good ones. But legal-constitutional changes

by themselves cannot overcome challenges to
democracy. This is like the rules of cricket. A change

in rules for LBW decisions helped to reduce negative
batting tactics. But no one would ever think that the

quality of cricket could be improved mainly through
changes in the rules. This is to be done mainly by the

players, coaches and administrators. Similarly,
democratic reforms are to be carried out mainly by
political activists, parties, movements and politicallyconscious citizens.
Any legal change must carefully look at what resultsit will have on politics. Sometimes the results may be
counter-productive. For example, many states have
banned people who have more than two children
from contesting panchayat elections. This has resulted
in denial of democratic opportunity to many poorand women, which was 
not intended. Generally, laws
that seek to ban something are not very successful inpolitics. Laws that give political actors incentives to do
good things have more chances of working. The best

laws are those which empower people to carry outdemocratic reforms. The Right to Information Act is
a good example of a law that empowers the peopleto find out what is happening in government and actas watchdogs of democracy. Such a law helps to
control corruption and supplements the existing laws
that banned corruption and imposed strict penalties.
Democratic reforms are to be brought about
principally through political practice. Therefore, themain focus of political reforms should be on ways to
strengthen democratic practice. As we discussed in thechapter on political parties, the most important concernshould be to increase and improve the quality ofpolitical participation by ordinary citizens.
Any proposal for political reforms should think not
only about what is a good solution but also about whowill implement it and how. It is not very wise to think
that the legislatures will pass legislations that go againstthe interest of all the political parties and MPs. But
measures that rely on democratic movements, citizens™organisations and the media are likely to succeed.Let us keep these general guidelines in mind andlook at some specific instances of challenges todemocracy that require some measure of reform. Let
us try to come up with some concrete proposals ofreform.

Challenges to Democracy109Here are some challenges that require political reforms. Discuss these challenges in detail. Study the reform
options offered here and give your preferred solution with reasons. Remember that none of the options

offered here is ‚right™ or ‚wrong™. You can opt 
for a mix of more than one options, or come up with something
that is not offered here. But you must give your solution in detail and offer reasons for your choice.Doctors™ absenteeismChallenge:Uttar Pradesh government got a survey done and
found out that most of the doctors posted in the rural
Primary Health Centres are simply not there. They live

in a town, carry out private practice and visit the village
where they are posted only once or twice in the entire
month. Villagers have to travel to towns and pay veryhigh fee to private doctors even for common ailments.
Reform proposals:
The government should make it compulsoryfor the doctors to live in the village where they areposted, otherwise their service should be terminated.
District administration and police should carryout surprise raids to check the attendance of the
doctors.
Village panchayat should be given the power towrite the annual report of the doctor which should
be read out in the Gram Sabha meeting.
Problems like this can be solved only if UttarPradesh is split into several smaller states which can
be administered more efficiently.
Political fundingChallenge:On an average, every candidate who contested thelast Lok Sabha elections owned a property of more
than Rs one crore. There is a fear that only wealthy
people or those with their support can afford to
fight elections. Most of the political parties are

dependent on money given by big business houses.
The worry is that the role of money in politics will
reduce whatever little voice the poor have in our
democracy.
Reform proposals:
The financial accounts of every political partyshould be made public. These accounts should beexamined by government auditors.
There should be state funding of elections.
Parties should be given some money by the
government to meet their election expenditure.Citizens should be encouraged to give moredonations to parties and to political workers.

Such donations should be exempt from income
tax.Any other problem of your choiceChallenge:Reform proposals:


110Democratic Politics
ReformingReformingReformingReformingReformingRose managed to catch Madam Lyngdoh outside the
classroom,something she had beenplanning to do for some time. ﬁMa™am! I
really liked that Canadian cartoonﬂ. Rose
needed something to open theconversation. ﬁWhich one?ﬂ Madam
Lyngdoh could not recall. ﬁMa™am, the one
which says 98% Canadians want all thepoliticians to be locked in the trunk of a
car and thrown into Niagara falls. I wasthinking of our politicians. We would need a
bigger vehicle and a river as mighty asBrahmaputra!ﬂ
Lyngdoh Ma™am smiled at Rose. Like most
Indians, she is also very much unhappy
with the way politicians of the country have been behaving and running the parties andgovernments. But she wanted Rose to appreciate the complexity of the problem: ﬁDo youthink our problems will be solved if we get rid of our politicians?,ﬂ she asked.
ﬁYes, Ma™am. Aren™t these mean politicians responsible for all the problems in our country?
I mean corruption, defection, casteism, communal violence, criminality– everything.ﬂ
Lyngdoh Madam: ﬁSo, all we need is to get rid of the current lot. Are you sure that those
who replace them will not do these things?ﬂRose: ﬁWell, I had not thought of it, but may be not. May be we will get leaders of better
characterﬂ.
Lyngdoh Madam: ﬁI agree with you that the situation will change if people show more care
and alertness to reject corrupt and bad politicians and elect the right ones. And, maybe,all politicians are not corrupt–ﬂ
ﬁHow can you say that Ma™amﬂ interrupted Rose.Lyngdoh Madam: ﬁI did not say that politicians are not corrupt. Maybe when you think of
politicians, you think of these big people whose photos appear in newspapers. I think of
political leaders that I have known. I don™t think that the political leaders I know are morecorrupt than my own colleagues, government officials, contractors or other middle classprofessionals that I know. The corruption of the politician is more visible and we get theimpression that all politicians are corrupt. Some of them are and some of them are not.ﬂ
Rose did not give up. ﬁMa™am, what I meant is that there should be strict laws to curbcorruption and wrong practices like appeals to caste and community.ﬂ
Lyngdoh Madam: ﬁI am not sure, Rose. For one thing there is already a law banning any
appeal to caste and religion in politics. Politicians find a way to bypass that. Laws canhave little impact unless people resist attempts to mislead and divide people in the name
of caste and religion. You cannot have democracy in a real sense unless people and
politicians overcome the barriers of caste and religion.ﬂ
politicspoliticspoliticspoliticspolitics
