Outcomes of Democracy89Chapter 7Outcomes ofDemocracy
OverviewAs we begin to wind up our tour of democracy, it is time to move
beyond our discussion of specific themes and ask a general set of
questions: What does democracy do? Or, what outcomes can we
reasonably expect of democracy? Also, does democracy fulfil theseexpectations in real life? We begin by thinking about how to assess
the outcomes of democracy. After some clarity on how to think on

this subject, we proceed to look at the expected and actual outcomes
of democracy in various respects: quality of government, economicwell-being, inequality, social differences and conflict and finally

freedom and dignity. Our final verdict Œ positive but qualified Œ

leads us to think about the challenges to democracy in the next
and final chapter.

90Democratic Politics
How do we assess democracy™s outcomes?
Do you remember how students inMadam Lyngdoh™s class argued about

democracy? This was in Chapter 2 of
Class IX textbook. It emerged from that
conversation that democracy is a betterform of government when compared

with dictatorship or any other alternative.
We felt that democracy was better

because it:Promotes equality among citizens;Enhances the dignity of theindividual;Improves the quality of decision-
making;Provides a method to resolve
conflicts; andAllows room to correct mistakes.
Are these expectations realised underdemocracies? When we talk to people
around us, most of them supportdemocracy against other alternatives,such as rule by a monarch or military or
religious leaders. But not so many of

them would be satisfied with the
democracy in practice. So we face a
dilemma: democracy is seen to be goodin principle, but felt to be not so good inits practice. This dilemma invites us to
think hard about the outcomes of
democracy. Do we prefer democracy
only for moral reasons? Or are there
some prudential reasons to support
democracy too?Over a hundred countries of theworld today claim and practice some
kind of democratic politics: they have
formal constitutions, they hold elections,

they have parties and they guarantee rights
of citizens. While these features are
common to most of them, these
democracies are very much different
from each other in terms of their social

situations, their economic achievements
and their cultures. Clearly, what may be

achieved or not achieved under each ofthese democracies will be very different.But is there something that we can expect
from every democracy, just because it is

democracy?Our interest in and fascination fordemocracy often pushes us into taking a
position that democracy can address all
socio-economic and political problems.

If some of our expectations are not met,we start blaming the idea of democracy.

Or, we start doubting if we are living in
a democracy. The first step towards

thinking carefully about the outcomes
of democracy is to recognise that
democracy is just a form ofgovernment.

It can only create conditions for achieving
something. The citizens have to take

advantage of those conditions and
achieve those goals. Let us examine some

of the things we can reasonably expect
from democracy and examine the record
of democracy.
Did we reachthese
conclusions inMadam Lyngdoh™s
class? I loved
that classbecausestudents were
not beingdictated anyconclusions.© RK Laxman - Brushing up the yearsIs democracy all about coping with multiple pressures andaccommodating diverse demands?
Outcomes of Democracy91Accountable, responsive and legitimate governmentThere are some things that democracymust provide. In a democracy, we are

most concerned with ensuring that
people will have the right to choose their
rulers and people will have control overthe rulers. Whenever possible and

necessary, citizens should be able to

participate in decision making, that affects
them all. Therefore, the most basic
outcome of democracy should be that
it produces a government that is
accountable to the citizens, and
responsive to the needs and expectations
of the citizens.
Before we go into this question, weface another common question: Is thedemocratic government efficient? Is it
effective? Some people think that
democracy produces less effective
government. It is, of course, true that
non-democratic rulers do not have to
bother about deliberation in assemblies or
worry about majorities and public opinion.
So, they can be very quick and efficient in

decision making and implementation.Democracy is based on the idea of
deliberation and negotiation. So, some delay

is bound to take place. Does that make
democratic government inefficient?Let us think in terms of costs.
Imagine a government that may take
decisions very fast. But it may take
decisions that are not accepted by the
people and may therefore face problems.

In contrast, the democratic government
will take more time to follow
procedures before arriving at a decision.
But because it has followed procedures,
its decisions may be both more
acceptable to the people and more
effective. So, the cost of time that

democracy pays is perhaps worth it.Now look at the other sideŒ
democracy ensures that decision makingwill be based on norms and procedures.

So, a citizen who wants to know if a

decision was taken through the correct
procedures can find this out. She has the
right and the means to examine the
process of decision making. This is

known as transparency. This factor is

often missing from a non-democratic
government. Therefore, when we aretrying to find out the outcomes of
democracy, it is right to expect

democracy to produce a government
that follows procedures and is
accountable to the people. We can also

expect that the democratic government
develops mechanisms for citizens to hold
the government accountable and
mechanisms for citizens to take part in
decision making whenever they think fit.If you wanted to measuredemocracies on the basis of this
expected outcome, you would look for
the following practices and institutions:
regular, free and fair elections; open
public debate on major policies and© Mike Keefe  - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Can you think of whatand how the
government knowsabout you and yourfamily (for example
ration cards and
voter identity cards)?
What are the sourcesof information for you
about the
government?Governmental Secrecy
92Democratic Politics
So, the bestoutcome of
democracy isthat it is ademocracy! That
is what we havediscovered afterall this mental
gymnastics?legislations; and citizens™ right toinformation about the government and

its functioning. The actual performance

of democracies shows a mixed record
on this. Democracies have had greater
success in setting up regular and free
elections and in setting up conditions for
open public debate. But most
democracies fall short of elections that
provide a fair chance to everyone and in
subjecting every decision to public debate.
Democratic governments do not have a
very good record when it comes to
sharing information with citizens. All one
can say in favour of democratic regimes
is that they are much better than any
non-democratic regime in these respects.
In substantive terms it may be
reasonable to expect from democracy a
government that is attentive to the needs
and demands of the people and is largely
free of corruption. The record of
democracies is not impressive on these
two counts. Democracies often frustrate

the needs of the people and often ignorethe demands of a majority of itspopulation. The routine tales ofcorruption are enough to convince us that
democracy is not free of this evil. At the
same time, there is nothing to show that
non-democracies are less corrupt ormore sensitive to the people.There is one respect in whichdemocratic government is certainly
better than its alternatives: democratic
government is legitimate government.
It may be slow, less efficient, not always

very responsive or clean. But a
democratic government is people™s own
government. That is why there is an
overwhelming support for the idea of
democracy all over the world. As the
accompanying evidence from South
Asia shows, the support exists in
countries with democratic regimes as
well as countries without democratic
regimes. People wish to be ruled by

representatives elected by them. They
also believe that democracy is suitable
for their country. Democracy™s ability

to generate its own support is itself an
outcome that cannot be ignored.Source: SDSA Team, 
State of Democracy in South Asia
, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007Democracy is preferredover dictatorshipeverywhere exceptPakistanSouth Asia28621062BangladeshIndiaNepal
PakistanSri LankaDemocracy ispreferable6970623771
Sometimes dictatorshipis better69101411
Doesn™tmatter to me2521284918
Those who agree with one ofthe statementsVery few doubt the suitability of democracy
for their own countryHow suitable is democracy for your country?Very suitableSuitableSouth Asia88
Bangladesh93
Sri Lanka92
India92
Pakistan84
Nepal79
050100
Overwhelming support for democracyThose who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the peopleStrongly agreeAgree
South Asia94
Sri Lanka98
Bangladesh96
India95
Nepal94
Pakistan81
050100

Outcomes of Democracy93Economic growth and developmentIf democracies are expected to produce
good governments, then is it not fair toexpect that they would also producedevelopment? Evidence shows that inpractice many democracies did not fulfil
this expectation.If you consider all democracies andall dictatorships for the fifty years between
1950 and 2000, dictatorships have slightlyhigher rate of economic growth. The
inability of democracy to achieve higher
economic development worries us. But
this alone cannot be reason to rejectdemocracy. As you have already studied

in economics, economic developmentdepends on several factors: country™s

population size, global situation,The Rich Get Buffcooperation from other countries,economic priorities adopted by thecountry, etc. However, the difference in
the rates of economic development
between less developed countries withdictatorships and democracies isnegligible. Overall, we cannot say that
democracy is a guarantee of economicdevelopment. But we can expectdemocracy not to lag behind
dictatorships in this respect.When we find such significantdifference in the rates of economic
growth between countries underdictatorship and democracy, it is better
to prefer democracy as it has severalother positive outcomes.
© RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc.Cartoon on this pageand next three pages tell
us about the disparitiesbetween the rich andpoor.  Should the gains
of economic growth be
evenly distributed? How
can the poor get a voicefor a better share in a
nation? What can the
poor countries do to
receive a greater share
in the world™s wealth?
94Democratic Politics
Arguments about democracy tend tobe very passionate. This is how itshould be, for democracy appeals tosome of our deep values. Thesedebates cannot be resolved in asimple manner. But some debates

about democracy can and should beresolved by referring to some factsand figures. The debate about the
economic outcomes of democracy isone such debate. Over the yearsmany students of democracy havegathered careful evidence to seewhat the relationship of democracywith economic growth and economic
inequalities is. The tables and thecartoon 
here present some of the evidences:
Table 1 shows that on an average dictatorial regimes have had a slightly better record
of economic growth. But when we compare their record only in poor countries, there isvirtually no difference.Table 2 shows that within democracies there can be very high degree of inequalities. In
democratic countries like South Africa and Brazil, the top 20 per cent people 
take awaymore than 60 per cent of the national income, leaving less than 3 per cent for the bottom20 per cent population. Countries like Denmark and Hungary are much better in this respect.You can see in the cartoon, there is often inequality of opportunities available to the
poorer sections.What would be your verdict on democracy if you had to base it purely on economicperformance of democratic regimes in terms of growth and equal distribution?Table 1
Rates of economic growth for different countries,1950-2000Table 2
Inequality of income in selected countriesType of regimes and countriesAll democratic regimesAll dictatorial regimesPoor countries under dictatorship

Poor countries under democracy
Growth Rate3.954.424.344.28Name of the% share of national
Countriesincome
Top 20 %Bottom 20 %
South Africa64.82.9
Brazil63.02.6
Russia53.74.4
USA50.04.0

United Kingdom45.06.0
Denmark34.59.6

Hungary34.410.0
Source: A Przeworski, M E Alvarez, J A Cheibub and F Limongi, Democracy andDevelopment: Political Institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990.Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2000.Poor Kids democracyEconomicoutcomes
of© Jimmy Margulies - Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Outcomes of Democracy95Reduction of inequality and povertyPerhaps more than development, it isreasonable to expect democracies to
reduce economic disparities. Even when

a country achieves economic growth, will
wealth be distributed in such a way thatall citizens of the country will have a
share and lead a better life? Is economic
growth in democracies accompanied by
increased inequalities among the people?
Or do democracies lead to a just
distribution of goods and opportunities?© Ares - 
Best of Latin America
, Cagle Cartoons Inc.Democracies are based on politicalequality. All individuals have equal weight
in electing representatives. Parallel to the

process of bringing individuals into the
political arena on an equal footing, wefind growing economic inequalities. A

small number of ultra-rich enjoy a highly
disproportionate share of wealth and
incomes. Not only that, their share in the

total income of the country has been
increasing. Those at the bottom of the

society have very little to depend upon.
Their incomes have been declining.

Sometimes they find it difficult to meettheir basic needs of life, such as food,
clothing, house, education and health.In actual life, democracies do notappear to be very successful in reducing
economic inequalities. In Class IX
Economics textbook, you have alreadystudied about poverty in India. Thepoor constitute a large proportionof our voters and no  party willlike to lose their votes. Yet
democratically electedgovernments do notappear to be as keen to
address the question of
poverty as you would
expect them to. The

situation is much worse insome other countries. In

Bangladesh, more than
half of its population lives
in poverty. People in
several poor countries are
now dependent on the rich
countries even for food
supplies.
Voice of the PoorDemocracy is arule of themajority. The
poor are inmajority. So
democracy must
be a rule of thepoor. How can
this not be the
case?
96Democratic Politics
World™s Wealth Owned by a FewAccommodation of social diversityAll you are sayingis thatdemocracyensures that
people do notbreak eachother™s head.
This is notharmony. Should
we be happy
about it?Do democracies lead to peaceful andharmonious life among citizens? It will
be a fair expectation that democracyshould produce a harmonious social life.
We have seen in the earlier chapters how
democracies accommodate various socialdivisions. We saw in the first chapter how
Belgium has successfully negotiateddifferences among ethnic populations.
Democracies usually develop a procedureto conduct their competition. This reducesthe possibility of these tensions becomingexplosive or violent.No society can fully and permanently
resolve conflicts among different groups.
But we can certainly learn to respect thesedifferences and we can also evolvemechanisms to negotiate the differences.
Democracy is best suited to produce thisoutcome. Non-democratic regimes oftenturn a blind eye to or suppress internalsocial differences. Ability to handle social
differences, divisions and conflicts is thus
a definite plus point of democratic
regimes. But the example of Sri Lanka

reminds us that a democracy must fulfiltwo conditions in order to achieve thisoutcome:It is necessary to understand thatdemocracy is not simply rule by majority
opinion.  The majority always needs to
work with the minority so thatgovernments function to represent thegeneral view. Majority and minority

opinions are not permanent.
It is also necessary that rule bymajority does not become rule by
majority community in terms of religion
or race or linguistic group, etc.  Rule by
majority means that in case of every
decision or in case of every election,different persons and groups may and© Manny Francisco - The Phillippines, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
Outcomes of Democracy97can form a majority. Democracy remains
democracy only as long as every citizen
has a chance of being in majority at some
point of time. If someone is barredThe two images depict two different kinds ofeffects democratic politics can have on social
divisions. Take one example for each image
and write a paragraph each on the outcomeof democratic politics in both situations.from being in majority on the basis ofbirth, then the democratic rule ceases
to be accommodative for that person
or group.
Dignity and freedom of the citizensDemocracy stands much superior to any
other form of government in

promoting dignity and freedom of the
individual. Every individual wants to
receive respect from fellow beings.
Often conflicts arise among individuals
because some feel that they are not
treated with due respect. The passion for
respect and freedom are the basis of
democracy. Democracies throughout the

world have recognised this, at least inprinciple. This has been achieved invarious degrees in various democracies.

For societies which have been built for

long on the basis of subordination and
domination, it is not a simple matter torecognize that all individuals are equal.Take the case of dignity of women.
Most societies across the world were
historically male dominated societies.

Long struggles by women have created

some sensitivity today that respect to andEnemiesGreeting© Ares - 
Best of Latin America
, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
98Democratic Politics
equal treatment of women are necessaryingredients of a democratic society. That

does not mean that women are actually
always treated with respect. But once the
principle is recognised, it becomes easierfor women to wage a struggle against

what is now unacceptable legally and
morally. In a non-democratic set up, this

unacceptability would not have legal basis
because the principle of individual
freedom and dignity would not have the
legal and moral force there. The same is
true of caste inequalities. Democracy in

India has strengthened the claims of thedisadvantaged and discriminated castes
for equal status and equal opportunity.

There are instances still of caste-based
inequalities and atrocities, but these lack
the moral and legal foundations. Perhaps

it is the recognition that makes ordinary
citizens value their democratic rights.
Expectations from democracy alsofunction as the criteria for judging any
democratic country. What is most
distinctive about democracy is that itsexamination never gets over. As
democracy passes one test, it producesanother test. As people get some benefitsof democracy, they ask for more and
want to make democracy even better.

That is why, when we ask people about

the way democracy functions, they willalways come up with more expectations,and many complaints. The fact that

people are complaining is itself a
testimony to the success of democracy:
it shows that people have developedawareness and the ability to expect andto look critically at power holders andthe high and the mighty. A public
expression of dissatisfaction with
democracy shows the success of the
democratic project: it transforms people

from the status of a subject into that ofa citizen. Most individuals today believethat their vote makes a difference to theway the government is run and to their
own self-interest.
The above cartoon and graph illustrate a point made in this section(Dignity and freedom of the citizens). Underline the sentences from
this section which connect to the cartoon or graph.I am anxiousabout my boardexams. Butdemocracy has
so many exams.And millions ofexaminers!Source: SDSA Team, 
State of Democracy in South
Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007.Rosa Parks Still Inspires© Pat Bagley - Cagle Cartoons Inc.Belief in the efficacy of vote is placed above thecalculus of utilityThose who say that their vote makes a difference...South Asia65
Bangladesh 66
India  67
Nepal       75
Pakistan                                   50
Sri Lanka  65
                      080

Outcomes of Democracy99Exercises
1.How does democracy produce an accountable, responsive and
legitimate government?2.What are the conditions under which democracies accommodate
social diversities?3.Give arguments to support or oppose the following assertions:
Industrialised countries can afford democracy but the poorneed dictatorship to become rich.Democracy can™t reduce inequality of incomes betweendifferent citizens.Government in poor countries should spend less on povertyreduction, health, education and spend more on industries andinfrastructure.In democracy all citizens have one vote, which means thatthere is absence of any domination and conflict.4.Identify the challenges to democracy in the following descriptions.
Also suggest policy/institutional mechanism to deepen democracyin the given situations:Following a High Court directive a temple in Orissa that hadseparate entry doors for dalits and non-dalits allowed entryfor all from the same door.
A large number of farmers are committing suicide in different
states of India.Following allegation of killing of three civilians in Gandwara in afake encounter by Jammu and Kashmir police, an enquiry hasbeen ordered.5.In the context of democracies, which of the following ideas is
correct Œ democracies have successfully eliminated:A.conflicts among people
B.economic inequalities among people
C.differences of opinion about how marginalised sections
are to be treatedD.the idea of political inequality
6.In the context of assessing democracy which among the following
is odd one out. Democracies need to ensure:A.free and fair elections
B.dignity of the individual
C.majority rule
D.equal treatment before law
7.Studies on political and social inequalities in democracy show that
A.democracy and development go together.
B.inequalities exist in democracies .
C.inequalities do not exist under dictatorship.
D.dictatorship is better than democracy.

100Democratic Politics
Exercises
8.Read the passage below:
Nannu is a daily wage earner. He lives in Welcome MazdoorColony, a slum habitation in East Delhi. He lost his rationcard and applied for a duplicate one in January 2004. Hemade several rounds to the local Food & Civil Supplies officefor the next three months. But the clerks and officials wouldnot even look at him, leave alone do his job or bother to tellhim the status of his application. Ultimately, he filed anapplication under the Right to Information Act asking for thedaily progress made on his application, names of theofficials, who were supposed to act on his application andwhat action would be taken against these officials for theirinaction. Within a week of filing application under the Right toInformation Act, he was visited by an inspector from theFood Department, who informed him that the card had beenmade and he could collect it from the office. When Nannuwent to collect his card next day, he was given a very warmtreatment by the Food & Supply Officer (FSO), who is thehead of a Circle. The FSO offered him tea and requested himto withdraw his application under the Right to Information,since his work had already been done.What does Nannu™s example show? What impact did Nannu™s
action have on officials? Ask your parents their experiences
when they approach government officials to attend to theirproblems. 
