29The Nationalist Movement in Indo-ChinaVietnam gained formal independence in 1945, before India, but
it took another three decades of fighting before the Republicof Vietnam was formed. This chapter on Indo-China will

introduce you to one of the important states of the peninsula, namely,
Vietnam.  Nationalism in Indo-China developed in a colonial context.
The knitting together of a modern Vietnamese nation that brought
the different communities together was in part the result ofcolonisation but, as importantly, it was shaped by the struggle against
colonial domination.If you see the historical experience of Indo-China in relation to thatof India, you will discover important differences in the way colonialempires functioned and the anti-imperial movement developed. By
looking at such differences and similarities you can  understand  the
variety of ways in which nationalism has developed and shaped thecontemporary world.The  Nationalist  Movement  in  Indo-China
Chapter IIThe Nationalist Movement inIndo-ChinaFig.1 Œ Map of Indo-China.
India and the Contemporary World301  Emerging from the Shadow of China
Indo-China comprises the modern countries of Vietnam, Laos andCambodia (see Fig. 1). Its early history shows many different groups
of people living in this area under the shadow of the powerful
empire of China. Even when an independent country was established
in what is now northern and central Vietnam, its rulers continuedto maintain the Chinese system of government as well asChinese culture.Vietnam was also linked to what has been called the maritime silkroute that brought in goods, people and ideas. Other networks of
trade connected it to the hinterlands where non-Vietnamese people
such as the Khmer Cambodians lived.Fig. 2 Œ The port of Faifo.This port was founded by Portuguese merchants. It was one of
the ports used by European trading companies much before the
nineteenth century.1.1 Colonial Domination and ResistanceThe colonisation of Vietnam by the French brought the people ofthe country into conflict with the colonisers in all areas of life. Themost visible form of French control was military and economic
domination but the French also built a system that tried to reshapethe culture of the Vietnamese. Nationalism in Vietnam emerged
through the efforts of different sections of society to fight againstthe French and all they represented.

31The Nationalist Movement in Indo-ChinaFig. 3 Œ Francis Garnier, a French officer who ledan attack against the ruling Nguyen dynasty,
being killed by soldiers of the court.
Garnier was part of the French team that explored
the Mekong river. In 1873 he was commissioned
by the French to try and establish a French
colony in Tonkin in the north. Garnier carried out
an attack on Hanoi, the capital of Tonkin, but was
killed in the fight.French troops landed in Vietnam in 1858and by the mid-1880s they had establisheda firm grip over the northern region.

After the Franco-Chinese war the
French  assumed control of Tonkin and
Anaam and, in 1887, French Indo-China
was formed. In the following decades
the French sought to consolidatetheir position, and people in Vietnam
began reflecting on the nature of theloss that Vietnam was suffering. Nationalist
resistance developed out of this reflection.Fig. 4 Œ The Mekong river, engraving by the French Exploratory Force, in which Garnier participated.Exploring and mapping rivers was part of the colonial enterprise everywhere in the world. Colonisers wanted to know

the route of the rivers, their origin, and the terrain they passed through. The rivers could then be properly used for
trade and transport. During these explorations innumerable pictures and maps were produced.
India and the Contemporary World32The famous blind poet Ngyuyen Dinh Chieu (1822-88) bemoaned
what was happening to his country:I would rather face eternal darknessThan see the faces of traitors.
I would rather see no man
Than encounter one man™s suffering.
I would rather see nothingThan witness the dismembering of the country
in decline.1.2 Why the French thought Colonies Necessary
Colonies were considered essential to supply natural resources and
other essential goods. Like other Western nations, France also thought
it was the mission of the ‚advanced™ European countries to bringthe benefits of civilisation to backward peoples.
The French began by building canals and draining lands in the Mekongdelta to increase cultivation. The vast system of irrigation works Œcanals and earthworks Œ built mainly with forced labour, increased
rice production and allowed the export of rice to the internationalmarket. The area under rice cultivation went up from 274,000hectares in 1873 to 1.1 million hectares in 1900 and 2.2 million in
1930. Vietnam exported two-thirds of its rice production and by1931 had become the third largest exporter of rice in the world.This was followed by infrastructure projects to help transport goodsfor trade, move military garrisons and control the entire region.Construction of a trans-Indo-China rail network that would linkthe northern and southern parts of Vietnam and China was begun.
This final link with Yunan in China was completed by 1910. The
second line was also built, linking Vietnam to Siam (as Thailand wasthen called), via the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh.By the 1920s, to ensure higher levels of profit for their businesses,French business interests were pressurising the government in Vietnamto develop the infrastructure further.
1.3 Should Colonies be Developed?Everyone agreed that colonies had to serve the interests of the mother

country. But the question was Œ how? Some like Paul Bernard, an

influential writer and policy-maker, strongly believed that theImagine a conversation between a Frenchcoloniser and a Vietnamese labourer in thecanal project. The Frenchman believes he isbringing civilization to backward people andthe Vietnamese labourer argues against it. Inpairs act out the conversation they may havehad, using evidence from the text.Activity
33The Nationalist Movement in Indo-Chinaeconomy of the colonies needed to be developed. He argued thatthe purpose of acquiring colonies was to make profits. If the

economy was developed and the standard of living of the peopleimproved, they would buy more goods. The market would
consequently expand, leading to better profits for French business.
Bernard suggested that there were several barriers to economic
growth in Vietnam: high population levels, low agriculturalproductivity and extensive indebtedness amongst the peasants. To

reduce rural poverty and increase agricultural productivity it wasnecessary to carry out land reforms as the Japanese had done in the
1890s. However, this could not ensure sufficient employment. As

the experience of Japan showed, industrialisation would be essentialto create more jobs.
The colonial economy in Vietnam was, however, primarily basedon rice cultivation and rubber plantations owned by the French anda small Vietnamese elite. Rail and port facilities were set up to service
this sector. 
Indentured
 Vietnamese labour was widely used in the
rubber plantations. The French, contrary to what Bernard would
have liked, did little to industrialise the economy. In the rural areas
landlordism spread and the standard of living declined.New wordsIndentured labour Œ A form of labour widely
used in the plantations from the mid-nineteenthcentury. Labourers worked on the basis of
contracts that did not specify any rights of
labourers but gave immense power toemployers. Employers could bring criminal
charges against labourers and punish and jail
them for non-fulfilment of contracts.
Fig. 5 Œ A French weapons merchant, Jean Dupuis, in Vietnam in the late
nineteenth century.
Many like him explored the regions in the hope of making profits from trade. He was
one of those who persuaded the French to try and establish a base in Vietnam.
India and the Contemporary World342  The Dilemma of Colonial Education
French colonisation was not based only on economic exploitation.It was also driven by the idea of a ‚civilising mission™. Like the British
in India, the French claimed that they were bringing modern civilisation
to the Vietnamese. They took for granted that Europe had developed
the most advanced civilisation. So it became the duty of the
Europeans to introduce these modern ideas to the colony even if
this meant destroying local cultures, religions and traditions, because
these were seen as outdated and prevented modern development.Education was seen as one way to civilise the ‚native™. But in orderto educate them, the French had to resolve a dilemma. How far
were the Vietnamese to be educated? The French needed an educated
local labour force but they feared that education might create
problems. Once educated, the Vietnamese may begin to question

colonial domination. Moreover, French citizens living in Vietnam
(called colons) began fearing that they might lose their jobs Œ as
teachers, shopkeepers, policemen Œ to the educated Vietnamese. So
they opposed policies that would give the Vietnamese full access to
French education.2.1 Talking ModernThe French were faced with yet another problem in the sphere of
education: the elites in Vietnam were powerfully influenced by
Chinese culture. To consolidate their power, the French had to

counter this Chinese influence. So they systematically dismantled the
traditional educational system and established French schools for
the Vietnamese. But this was not easy. Chinese, the language used by

the elites so far, had to be replaced. But what was to take its place?
Was the language to be Vietnamese or French?
There were two broad opinions on this question. Some policy-makers emphasised the need to use the French language as the
medium of instruction. By learning the language, they felt, the
Vietnamese would be introduced to the culture and civilisation of
France. This would help create an ‚Asiatic France solidly tied to

European France™. The educated people in Vietnam would respect
French sentiments and ideals, see the superiority of French culture,
and work for the French. Others were opposed to French being
the only medium of instruction. They suggested that Vietnamese be

taught in lower classes and French in the higher classes. The few

35The Nationalist Movement in Indo-Chinawho learnt French and acquired French culture were to be rewardedwith French citizenship.
However, only the Vietnamese elite Œ comprising a small fractionof the population Œ could enroll in the schools, and only a few
among those admitted ultimately passed the school-leaving
examination. This was largely because of a deliberate policy of failingstudents, particularly in the final year, so that they could not qualify
for the better-paid jobs. Usually, as many as two-thirds of the students

failed. In 1925, in a population of 17 million, there were less than400 who passed the examination.School textbooks glorified the French and justified colonial rule.The Vietnamese were represented as primitive and backward, capableof manual labour but not of intellectual reflection; they could workin the fields but not rule themselves; they were ‚skilled copyists™ but
not creative. School children were told that only French rule couldensure peace in Vietnam: ‚Since the establishment of French rule theVietnamese peasant no longer lives in constant terror of pirates –
Calm is complete, and the peasant can work with a good heart.™
2.2 Looking ModernThe Tonkin Free School was star
ted in 1907 to provide a Western-
style education. This education included classes in science, hygieneand French (these classes were held in the evening and had to bepaid for separately). The school™s approach to what it means to

be ‚modern™ is a good example of the thinking prevalent at thattime. It was not enough to learn science and Western ideas: to be
modern the Vietnamese had to also look modern. The school
encouraged the adoption of Western styles such as having a short
haircut. For the Vietnamese this meant a major break with their own
identity since they traditionally kept long hair. To underline the

importance of a total change there was even a ‚haircutting chant™:Comb in the left handScissors in the right,
Snip, snip, clip, clip!
Watch out, be careful,
Drop stupid practices,
Dump childish thingsSpeak openly and franklyStudy Western customs
Imagine you are a student in the Tonkin Free
School in 1910. How would you react to:what the textbooks say about theVietnamese?what the school tells you about hairstyles?ActivityFig. 6 Œ A local caricature ridiculing theVietnamese who has been westernised.
Abandoning his own culture, he has begun
wearing Western clothes and playing tennis.
India and the Contemporary World362.3 Resistance in SchoolsTeachers and students did not blindly follow the curriculum.
Sometimes there was open opposition, at other times there wassilent resistance. As the numbers of Vietnamese teachers increasedin the lower classes, it became difficult to control what was actually
taught. While teaching, Vietnamese teachers quietly modified the textand criticised what was stated.In 1926 a major protest erupted in the Saigon Native Girls School.A Vietnamese girl sitting in one of the front seats was askedto move to the back of the class and allow a local French studentto occupy the front bench. She refused. The principal, also a
colon (French people in the colonies), expelled her. When angry
students protested, they too were expelled, leading to a furtherspread of open protests. Seeing the situation getting out of control,

the government forced the school to take the students back.The principal reluctantly agreed but warned the students, ‚I will crushall Vietnamese under my feet. Ah! You wish my deportation. Know

well that I will leave only after I am assured Vietnamese no longerinhabit Cochinchina.™
Elsewhere, students fought against the colonial government™s efforts
to prevent the Vietnamese from qualifying for white-collar jobs.
They were inspired by patriotic feelings and the conviction that itwas the duty of the educated to fight  for the benefit of society.

This brought them into conflict with the French as well as thetraditional elite, since both saw their positions threatened. By the1920s, students were forming various political parties, such as the

Party of Young Annan, and publishing nationalist journals such as
the Annanese Student.Schools thus became an important place for political and culturalbattles. The French sought to strengthen their rule in Vietnam through
the control of education. They tried to change the values, norms
and perceptions of the people, to make them believe in the superiority
of French civilisation and the inferiority of the Vietnamese.Vietnamese intellectuals, on the other hand, feared that Vietnam waslosing not just control over its territory but its very identity: its own
culture and customs were being devalued and the people were
developing a master-slave mentality. The battle against French
colonial education became part of the larger battle against colonialism
and for independence.Some important dates1802Nguyen Anh becomes emperor symbolising
the unification of the country under the Nguyendynasty.
1867Cochinchina (the South) becomes a Frenchcolony.
1887Creation of the Indo-china Union, includingCochinchina, Annam, Tonkin, Cambodia and
later, Laos.
1930Ho Chi Minh forms the VietnameseCommunist Party.
1945Vietminh start a general popular insurrection.Bao Dai abdicates. Ho Chi Minh declaresindependence in Hanoi (September 23).1954The French army is defeated at Dien Bien Phu.1961Kennedy decides to increase US military aid toSouth Vietnam.1974Paris Peace Treaty.
1975 (April 30)NLF troops enter Saigon.1976The Socialist Republic of Vietnam isproclaimed.
37The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China3  Hygiene, Disease and Everyday ResistanceEducation was not the only sphere of everyday life in which suchpolitical battles against colonialism were fought. In many otherinstitutions we can see the variety of small ways in which the colonisedexpressed their anger against the colonisers.
3.1 Plague Strikes HanoiTake the case of health and hygiene. When the French set about

creating a modern Vietnam, they decided to rebuild Hanoi.
The latest ideas about architecture and modern engineering skillswere employed to build a new and ‚modern™ city. In 1903,
the modern part of Hanoi was struck by bubonic plague. In
many colonial countries, measures to control the spread of disease
created serious social conflicts. But in Hanoi events took a peculiarly
interesting turn.The French part of Hanoi was built as a beautiful and clean city withwide avenues and a well-laid-out sewer system, while the ‚nativeFig. 7 Œ Modern Hanoi.Colonial buildings like this one came up in
the French part of Hanoi.
India and the Contemporary World38What does the 1903 plague and the measuresto control it tell us about the French colonialattitude towards questions of health andhygiene?Discussquarter™ was not provided with any modern facilities. The refuse
from the old city drained straight out into the river or, during heavyrains or floods, overflowed into the streets. Thus what was installed

to create a hygienic environment in the French city became the causeof the plague. The large sewers in the modern part of the city, a
symbol of modernity, were an ideal and protected breeding ground

for rats. The sewers also served as a great transport system, allowing
the rats to move around the city without any problem. And ratsbegan to enter the well-cared-for homes of the French through the
sewage pipes. What was to be done?
3.2 The Rat HuntTo stem this invasion, a rat hunt was started in 1902.  The French

hired Vietnamese workers and paid them for each rat they caught.Rats began to be caught in thousands: on 30 May, for instance, 20,000
were caught but still there seemed to be no end. For the Vietnamese

the rat hunt seemed to provide an early lesson in the success ofcollective bargaining. Those who did the dirty work of entering
sewers found that if they came together they could negotiate a higher
bounty. They also discovered innovative ways to profit from this
situation. The bounty was paid when a tail was given as proof thata rat had been killed. So the rat-catchers took to just clipping the
tails and releasing the rats, so that the process could be repeated,over and over again. Some people, in fact, began  raising  rats toearn a bounty.
Defeated by the resistance of the weak, the French were forced toscrap the bounty programme. None of this prevented the bubonicplague, which swept through the area in 1903 and in subsequent
years. In a way, the rat menace marks the limits of French power
and the contradictions in their ‚civilising mission™. And the actions ofthe rat-catchers tell us of the numerous small ways in which
colonialism was fought in everyday life.
39The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China4  Religion and Anti-colonialism
Fig. 8 Œ The execution of Father Borie, a Catholicmissionary.
Images like this by French artists were publicised
in France to stir up religious fury.Box 1Confucius (551-479 
BCE
), a Chinese thinker,
developed a philosophical system based on good
conduct, practical wisdom and proper social
relationships. People were taught to respect their
parents and submit to elders. They were told
that the relationship between the ruler and the
people was the same as that between children
and parents.Colonial domination was exercised by control over all areas of privateand public life. The French occupied Vietnam militarily but they alsosought to reshape social and cultural life. While religion played animportant role in strengthening colonial control, it also provided
ways of resistance. Let us consider how this happened.Vietnam™s religious beliefs were a mixture of Buddhism,
Confucianism and local  practices. Christianity, introduced by French

missionaries, was intolerant of this easygoing attitude and viewedthe Vietnamese tendency to revere the supernatural as something tobe corrected.From the eighteenth century, many  religious movements were hostile
to the Western presence. An early movement against French control
and the spread of Christianity was the Scholars Revolt in 1868. This
revolt was led by officials at the imperial court angered by the spreadof Catholicism and French power. They led a general uprising in

India and the Contemporary World40New wordsSyncretic Œ Characterised by syncretism; aims
to bring together different beliefs and practices,seeing their essential unity rather than theirdifference
Concentration camp Œ A prison where peopleare  detained without due process of law. The
word evokes an image of a place of torture
and brutal treatmentNgu An and Ha Tien provinces where over a thousand Catholicswere killed. Catholic missionaries had been active in winning convertssince the early seventeenth century, and by the middle of the

eighteenth century had converted some 300,000.  The French crushed
the movement but this uprising served to inspire other patriots to
rise up against them.The elites in Vietnam were educated in Chinese and Confucianism.But religious beliefs among the peasantry were shaped by a varietyof 
syncretic
 traditions that combined Buddhism and local beliefs.
There were many popular religions in Vietnam that were spread bypeople who claimed to have seen a vision of God. Some of thesereligious movements supported the French, but others inspired
movements against colonial rule.One such movement was the Hoa Hao. It began in 1939
and gained great popularity in the fertile Mekong delta area. It
drew on religious ideas popular in anti-French uprisings of thenineteenth century.
The founder of Hoa Hao was a man called Huynh Phu So. He
performed miracles and helped the poor. His criticism against useless
expenditure had a wide appeal. He also opposed the sale of childbrides, gambling and the use of alcohol and opium.The French tried to suppress the movement inspired by HuynhPhu So. They declared him mad, called him the Mad Bonze,
and put him in a mental asylum. Interestingly, the doctor who

had to prove him insane became his follower, and finally in 1941,even the French doctors declared that he was sane. The Frenchauthorities exiled him to Laos and sent many of his followers to
concentration camps.Movements like this always had a contradictory relationship withmainstream nationalism. Political parties often drew upon their

support, but were uneasy about their activities.  They could neither
control or discipline these groups, nor support their ritualsand practices.
Yet the significance of these movements in arousing anti-imperialist
sentiments should not be underestimated.
41The Nationalist Movement in Indo-ChinaIn Japan, Phan Boi Chau and Phan Chu Trinh
spent time together, discussing their visions of

Vietnamese independence, and debating their
differences. This is what Phan Boi Chau later
wrote about their discussions:‚Thereafter over more than ten days, he and Idebated time and again, and our opinions were
diametrically opposed. That is to say, he wished

to overthrow the monarchy in order to create a

basis for the promotion of popular rights; I, on
the contrary, maintained that first the foreign

enemy should be driven out, and after our
nation™s independence was restored we could
talk about other things. My plan was to make
use of the monarchy, which he opposed

absolutely. His plan was to raise up the people

to abolish the monarchy, with which I absolutely

disagreed. In other words, he and I were pursuing
one and the same goal, but our means were
considerably different.™
SourceSource ANew wordsRepublic Œ A form of government based on
popular consent and popular representation.It is based on the power of the people as
opposed to monarchyFrench colonialism was resisted at many levels and in various forms.
But all nationalists had to grapple with one set of questions: What
was it to be Modern? What was it to be Nationalist?  In order to be

modern, was it necessary to regard tradition as backward and reject
all earlier ideas and social practices?  Was it necessary to consider the

‚West™ as the symbol of development and civilisation, and try and

copy the West?
Different answers were offered to such questions. Some intellectuals
felt that Vietnamese traditions had to be strengthened to resist
the domination of the West, while others felt that Vietnam had

to learn from the West even while opposing foreign domination.

These differing visions led to complex debates, which could not be
easily resolved.In the late nineteenth century, resistance to French domination was
very often led by Confucian scholar-activists, who saw their world
crumbling. Educated in the Confucian tradition, Phan Boi Chau

(1867-1940) was one such nationalist. He became a major figure in

the anti-colonial resistance from the time he formed the Revolutionary

Society (Duy Tan Hoi) in 1903, with 
Prince Cuong  De as 
the head.Phan Boi Chau met the Chinese reformer Liang Qichao (1873-1929)
in Yokohama in 1905. Phan™s most influential book, 
The History of
the Loss of Vietnam was written under the strong influence and advice
of Qichao. It became a widely read bestseller in Vietnam and China

and was even made into a play. The book focuses on two connected

themes: the loss of sovereignty and the severing of ties with China Œ
ties that bound the elites of the two countries within a shared culture.
It is this double loss that Phan laments, a lament that was typical of
reformers from within the traditional elite.
Other nationalists strongly differed with Phan Boi Chau. One suchwas Phan Chu Trinh (1871-1926). He was intensely hostile to the

monarchy and opposed to the idea of resisting the French with the
help of the court.  His desire was to establish a democratic 
republic.Profoundly influenced by the democratic ideals of the West, he did

not want a wholesale rejection of Western civilisation. He accepted

the French revolutionary ideal of liberty but charged the French
for not abiding by the ideal. He demanded that the French set up
legal and educational institutions, and develop agriculture
and industries.
5  The Vision of Modernisation
What ideas did Phan Boi Chau and Phan
Chu Trinh share in common? What did theydiffer on?Discuss
India and the Contemporary World425.1 Other Ways of Becoming Modern: Japan and ChinaEarly Vietnamese nationalists had a close relationship with Japanand China. They provided models for those looking to change, arefuge for those who were escaping French police, and a locationwhere a wider Asian network of revolutionaries could be established.In the first decade of the twentieth century a ‚go east movement™became popular.  In 1907-08 some 300 Vietnamese students went
to Japan to acquire modern education. For many of them the primary

objective was to drive out the French from Vietnam, overthrowthe puppet emperor and re-establish the Nguyen dynasty that hadbeen deposed by the French. These nationalists looked for foreign
arms and help. They appealed to the Japanese as fellow Asians.
Japan had modernised itself and had resisted colonisation by theWest. Besides, its victory over Russia in 1907 proved its military

capabilities. Vietnamese students established a branch of the
Restoration Society in Tokyo but after 1908, the Japanese Ministry
of Interior clamped down on them. Many, including Phan Boi Chau,

were deported and forced to seek exile in China and Thailand.Developments in China also inspiredVietnamese nationalists. In 1911, the long

established monarchy in China wasoverthrown by a popular movement underSun Yat-sen, and a Republic was set up.

Inspired by these developments, Vietnamesestudents organised the Association for theRestoration of Vietnam (Viet-Nam
Quan Phuc Hoi). Now the nature of theanti-French independence movementchanged. The objective was no longer to
set up a constitutional monarchy but ademocratic republic.Soon, however, the anti-imperialist movementin Vietnam came under a new typeof leadership.
Fig. 9 Œ Cartoon of Vietnamese nationalists chasing away imperialists.In all such nationalist representations of struggle the nationalists
appear heroic, marching ahead, while the imperial forces flee.
43The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China6  The Communist Movement and Vietnamese Nationalism
The Great Depression of the 1930s had a profound impact onVietnam. The prices of rubber and rice fell, leading to rising ruraldebts, unemployment and rural uprisings, such as in the provincesof Nghe An and Ha Tinh. These provinces were among the poorest,
had an old radical tradition, and have been called the ‚electrical fuses™of Vietnam Œ when the system was under pressure they were thefirst to blow. The French put these uprisings down with great severity,

even using planes to bomb demonstrators.
In February 1930, Ho Chi Minh brought together competing
nationalist groups to establish the Vietnamese Communist (Vietnam
Cong San Dang) Party, later renamed the Indo-Chinese Communist
Party. He was inspired by the militant demonstrations of the European
communist parties.
In 1940 Japan occupied Vietnam, as part of its imperial drive tocontrol Southeast Asia. So nationalists now had to fight against theJapanese as well as the French. The League for the Independence of
Vietnam (Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh), which came to be knownas the Vietminh, fought the Japanese occupation and recapturedHanoi in September 1945.  The Democratic Republic of Vietnam

was formed and Ho Chi Minh became Chairman.
6.1 The New Republic of VietnamThe new republic faced a number of challenges. The French tried to

regain control by using the emperor, Bao Dai, as their puppet. Facedwith the French offensive, the Vietminh were forced to retreat tothe hills. After eight years of fighting, the French were defeated in

1954 at  Dien Bien Phu.
The Supreme French Commander of the French armies, General
Henry Navarre had declared confidently in 1953 that they would
soon be victorious. But on 7 May 1954, the Vietminh annihilated
and captured more than 16,000 soldiers of the French ExpeditionaryCorps. The entire commanding staff, including a general, 16 colonels

and 1,749 officers, were taken prisoner.
In the peace negotiations in Geneva that followed the French defeat,the Vietnamese were persuaded to accept the division of the country.

North and south were split: Ho Chi Minh and the communists tookDeclaration of independenceThe declaration of the new republic began byreaffirming the principles of the declaration of
independence of the United States in 1771 and
of the French Revolution in 1791 but added that
the French imperialists do not follow these
principles for they‚have violated our fatherland and oppressed ourfellow citizens. They have acted contrary to the
ideals of humanity and justice.‚In the field of politics, they have deprivedus of all liberties. They have imposed upon us
inhuman laws – They have built more prisons
than schools. They have mercilessly slain our

patriots; they have drowned our uprisings in

rivers of blood.‚They have fettered public opinion; they havepracticed obscurantism against our people –
‚For these reasons, we members of theProvisional Government, representing the entirepopulation of Vietnam, declare that we shall
henceforth have no connection with imperialist

France; that we abolish all the privileges which

the French have arrogated to themselves on
our territory –‚We solemnly proclaim to the entire world:
Vietnam has the right to be free and
independent, and in fact has become free and
independent.™
SourceSource BNew wordsObscurantist Œ Person or ideas that mislead
India and the Contemporary World44power in the north while Bao Dai™s regime was put in power
in the south.This division set in motion a series of events that turnedVietnam into a battlefield bringing death and destruction toits people as well as the environment. The Bao Dai regime
was soon overthrown by a coup led by Ngo Dinh Diem.Diem built a repressive and authoritarian government. Anyonewho opposed him was called a communist and was jailed
and killed. Diem retained Ordinance 10, a French law thatpermitted Christianity but outlawed Buddhism. His dictatorial
rule came to be opposed by a broad opposition united under
the banner of the National Liberation Front (NLF).With the help of the Ho Chi Minh government in the north,the NLF fought for the unification of the country. The US
Fig. 10 Œ The French Commander in Indo-China,General Henri Navarre (right).
Navarre wanted to attack the Vietminh even in their
remote bases. As a consequence the French opened
many fronts of attack and scattered their forces.
Navarre™s plans backfired in the North Eastern Valley
of Dien Bien Phu.Box 2At Dien Bien Phu the French were outwitted by the Vietminh forces led by General Vo Nguyen Giap. The French
Commander, Navarre, had not thought of all the problems he would face in the battle. The valley where French garrisons

were located was flooded in the monsoon and the area was covered with bushes, making it difficult to move troops and
tanks, or trace the Vietminh anti-aircraft guns hidden in the jungle.From their base in the hills, the Vietminh surrounded the French garrisons in the valley below, digging trenches and tunnelsto move without being detected. Supplies and reinforcements could not reach the besieged French garrison, the wounded
French soldiers could not be moved, and the French airstrip became unusable because of continuous artillery fire.
Dien Bien Phu became a very important symbol of struggle. It strengthened Vietminh conviction in their capacity to fightpowerful imperial forces through determination and proper strategy. Stories of the battle were retold in villages and cities

to inspire people.Fig. 11 Œ Supplies being takento Dien Bien Phu.
Vietminh forces used bicycles
and porters to transport
supplies. They went through
jungles and hidden tracks to
escape enemy attacks.

45The Nationalist Movement in Indo-ChinaBox 3Ho Chi Minh (1890-1969)Little is known about his early life mostly because Minh chose to downplay his personal background and identify himselfwith the cause of Vietnam. Probably born as Nguyen Van Thanh in Central Vietnam, he studied at French schools that

produced leaders such as Ngo Dinh Diem, Vo Nguyen Giap and Pham Van Dong. He briefly taught in 1910, and in 1911,

learnt baking and took a job on a French liner on the Saigon-Marseilles run. Minh became an active member of the
Commintern, meeting Lenin and other leaders. In May 1941, after 30 years abroad in Europe, Thailand and China, Minh
finally returned to Vietnam. In 1943 he took the name Ho Chi Minh (He Who Enlightens). He became president of the
Vietnam Democratic Republic. Ho Chi Minh died on 3 September 1969. He led the party successfully for over 40 years,
struggling to preserve Vietnamese autonomy.
watched this alliance with fear. Worried about communists gaining
power, it decided to intervene decisively, sending in troops

and arms.
6.2 The Entry of the US into 
the WarUS entry into the war marked a new phase that proved costly to theVietnamese as well as to the Americans. From 1965 to 1972, over
3,403,100 US services personnel served in Vietnam (7,484 were
women). Even though the US had advanced technology and good
Fig. 12 Œ American soldiers searching rice fields for Vietcongs.
India and the Contemporary World46Box 4Agent Orange: The Deadly PoisonAgent Orange is a defoliant, a plant killer, so called
because it was stored in drums marked with an
orange band. Between 1961 and 1971, some
11 million gallons of this chemical was sprayed
from cargo planes by US forces. Their plan was
to destroy forests and fields, so that it would be
easier to kill if there was no jungle cover for
people to hide in. Over 14 per cent of the
country™s farmland was affected by this poison.
Its effect has been staggering, continuing to
affect people till today. Dioxin, an element of

Agent Orange, is known to cause cancer and
brain damage in children, and, according to a
study, is also the cause of the high incidence of

deformities found in the sprayed areas.The tonnage of bombs, including chemical arms,used during the US intervention (mostly against
civilian targets) in Vietnam exceeds that used
throughout the Second World War.
medical supplies, casualties were high. About 47,244 died in battleand 303,704 were wounded. (Of those wounded, 23,014 were listed
by the Veterans Administration to be 100 per cent disabled.)
This phase of struggle with the US was brutal. Thousands of US
troops arrived equipped with heavy weapons and tanks and backed
by the most powerful bombers of the time Œ B52s. The 
wide spread
attacks and use of chemical weapons Œ 
Napalm,
 Agent Orange, and
phosphorous bombs Œ destroyed many villages  and decimated jungles.

Civilians died in large numbers.
The effect of the war was felt within the US as well. Many werecritical of the government for getting involved in a war that they sawas indefensible. When the youth were drafted for the war, the anger
spread. Compulsory service in the armed forces, however, could be

waived for university graduates. This meant that many of those sent

to fight did not belong to the privileged elite but were minorities andchildren of working-class families.
The US media and films played a major role in both supporting aswell as criticising the war. Hollywood made films in support of the

war, such as John Wayne™s 
Green Berets
 (1968). This has
been cited by many as an example of an unthinkingpropaganda film that was responsible for motivatingmany young men to die in the war. Other films were

more critical as they tried to understand the reasons
for this war. Fr
ancis Ford
 Coppola™s 
Apocalypse Now
(1979) reflected the moral confusion that the war hadcaused in the US.
The war grew out of a fear among US policy-planners
that the victory of the  Ho Chi Minh government would
start a domino effect Œ communist governments wouldbe established in other countries in the area. They
underestimated the power of nationalism to move
people to action, inspire them to sacrifice their home and family, live
under horrific conditions, and fight for independence. Theyunderestimated the power of a small country to fight the most
technologically advanced country in the world.Fig. 13
 Œ In December 1972 Hanoi was bombed.
New wordsNapalm Œ An organic compound used to thicken gasoline for firebombs. The mixture burns slowly and when it
comes in contact with surfaces like the human body, it sticks and continues to burn. Developed in the US, it was

used in the Second World War. Despite an international outcry, it was used in Vietnam.

47The Nationalist Movement in Indo-China6.3 The Ho Chi Minh TrailThe story of the Ho Chi Minh trail is one way of understanding thenature of the war that the Vietnamese fought against the US. It
symbolises how the Vietnamese used their limited resources to greatadvantage. The trail, an immense network of footpaths and roads,
was used to transport men and materials from the north to the south.The trail was improved from the late 1950s, and from 1967 about
20,000 North Vietnamese troops came south each month on this trail.The trail had support bases and hospitals along the way. In some parts
supplies were transported in trucks, but mostly they were carried byporters, who were mainly women. These porters carried about 25

kilos on their backs, or about 70 kilos on their bicycles.
Most of the trail was outside Vietnam in neighbouring Laosand Cambodia with branch lines extending into South Vietnam. The
US regularly bombed this trail trying to disrupt supplies, but efforts
to destroy this important supply line by intensive bombing failedbecause they were rebuilt very quickly.
Fig. 15 Œ Rebuilding damaged roads.Roads damaged by bombs were quickly rebuilt.Fig.14 Œ The Ho Chi Minh trail.
Notice how the trail moved through Laos and
Cambodia.NORTHVIETNAMKhesanhHueDanangQuangngaiQuinhonDaktoPheikuBanmethuotTayninh
SaigonLAOSTHAILANDCAMBODIASOUTHVIETNAMSouth China SeaTonle Sap
MekongMekongHoChiMinhTrail
India and the Contemporary World48Fig.16 Œ On the Ho Chi Minh trail.Letters of Mr Do SamDo Sam was a colonel in the North Vietnamese artillery regiment. He was part of the Tet Offensive started in 1968, to
unify North and South Vietnam and win the battle against US. These are extracts from his letters written to his wife from
the scene of battle. They show how, in the nationalist imagination, personal love mingles with love for the country and the
desire for freedom. Sacrifice appears necessary for happiness.Letter dated 6/1968‚You ask me what ﬁyou miss most when you think of me?ﬂ I miss the environment of our wedding ... I miss the small cozy

room with lots of memories. I miss –‚Right after our wedding I had to again leave to fight in order to protect the coastal areas of our country. What a short
time we had before I had to station permanently in the South. The more I think, the more I feel for you; therefore I
would have to be more determined to protect the country in order to bring happiness for millions of couples like us –‚Last night the car kept heading south. This morning I am writing to you sitting on a stone, surrounded by the sound ofstreams and the rustle of trees, as if they were celebrating our happiness. Looking forward to the day when we can return
victoriously. Then we could live in greater happiness, couldn™t we? Wish you good health and miss me always –™
Letter dated 6/1968‚Though you are always in my mind I have to focus on my work to contribute to the victory of the ongoing struggle of
our nation –‚I have promised myself that only when the South is liberated and peace and happiness return to the people, only then
could I be free to focus on building our own happiness, only then I could be satisfied with our family life –™
- Hung, Dang Vuong,                                               (Letters Written during the War in Vietnam),  publication of Hoi nha
van (Writers™ Association), 2005. Translation by Nguen Quoc Anh.
SourceSource C"Nhng lá th
 thi chin Vi
t Nam

