Federalism
13Chapter 2FederalismOverviewIn the previous chapter, we noted that vertical division of power amongdifferent levels of government is one of the major forms of power-sharing in modern democracies. In this chapter, we focus on this formof power-sharing. It is most commonly referred to as federalism. Webegin by describing federalism in general terms. The rest of the chaptertries to understand the theory and practice of federalism in India. Adiscussion of the federal constitutional provisions is followed by ananalysis of the policies and politics that has strengthened federalism inpractice. Towards the end of the chapter, we turn to the localgovernment, a new and third tier of Indian federalism.
14Democratic PoliticsWhat is federalism?Let us get back to the contrast betweenBelgium and Sri Lanka that we saw inthe last chapter. Y
ou would recall thatone of the key changes made in theConstitution of Belgium was to reducethe power of the Central Governmentand to give these powers to the regionalgov
ernments. Regional gov
ernmentsexisted in Belgium even earlier. T
heyhad their roles and powers.
 But all thesepowers were given to thesegov
ernments and could be withdrawnby the Central Government. T
hechange that took place in 1993 was thatthe regional gov
ernments were givenconstitutional powers that were nolonger dependent on the centralgov
ernment. T
hus, Belgium shiftedfrom a unitary to a federal form ofgov
ernment. Sri Lanka continues to be,for all practical purposes, a unitarysystem where the national gov
ernmenthas all the powers. T
amil leaders wantSri Lanka to become a federal system.Federalism is a system ofgov
ernment in which the power isdivided between a central authority andvarious constituent units of thecountry.
 Usually,
 a federation has twolevels of gov
ernment. One is thegov
ernment for the entire country thatis usually responsible for a few subjectsof common national interest. T
heothers are gov
ernments at the level ofprovinces or states that look aftermuch of the day-to-day administeringof their state. Both these levels ofgov
ernments enjoy their powerindependent of the other.I am confused.What do we call
the Indian
government? Isit Union, Federalor Central?Though only 25 of the world™s 192 countries have federal political systems, their citizens make up 40 per cent ofthe world™s population. Most of the large countries of the world are federations. Can you notice an exception to thisrule in this map?Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002, McGill-Queen™s University Press, 2002.Federalpolitical systemsCanadaUnited States
of AmericaMexicoPACIFIC OCEANMicronesiaArgentinaVenezuelaATLANTICOCEANBrazilSt. Kitts
and NevisBelgiumSwitzerlandSpainNigeriaEthiopiaComorosBosnia and
HerzegovinaAustriaPakistanRussiaIndiaMalaysiaAustraliaINDIAN
OCEANSouth AfricaPACIFIC OCEANUnited
Arab
EmiratesGermany
Federalism
15Jurisdiction: T
he areaov
er which someonehas legal authority. T
hearea may be defined interms of geogra
phicalboundaries or in termsof certain kinds ofsubjects.7The federal system thus has dualobjectives: to safeguard and promoteunity of the country,
 while at the sametime accommodate regional diversity.Therefore, two aspects are crucial forthe institutions and practice offederalism. Governments at different
levels should agr
ee to some rules ofpower-sharing. T
hey should also trustthat each would abide by its part ofthe agr
eement. An ideal federal systemhas both aspects : mutual trust andagr
eement to live together.The exact balance of powerbetween the central and the stategov
ernment varies from one federationto another.  This balance dependsmainly on the historical context in whichthe federation was formed. T
here aretwo kinds of routes through whichfederations have been formed. T
he firstroute involves independent Statescoming together on their own to forma bigger unit, so that by poolingsovereignty and retaining identity theycan increase their security. T
his type of‚coming together™ federations includethe USA, Switzerland and Australia. Inthis first category of federations, all theconstituent States usually have equalpower and are strong vis-à-vis thefederal gov
ernment.The second route is where a large
country decides to divide its powerbetween the constituent States and thenational gov
ernment. India, Spain andBelgium are examples of this kind of
‚holding together™ federations. 
Inthis second category,
 the centralgov
ernment tends to be more powerfulvis-à-vis the States. V
ery often differentconstituent units of the federation have
unequal powers.
 Some units aregr
anted special powers.
If federalismworks only in big
countries, whydid Belgium
adopt it?In this sense, federations arecontrasted with unitary gov
ernments.Under the unitary system, either thereis only one level of gov
ernment or thesub-units are subordinate to the central
gov
ernment. T
he central gov
ernmentcan pass on orders to the provincial orthe local gov
ernment. But in a federalsystem, the central gov
ernment cannotorder the state gov
ernment to dosomething. State gov
ernment haspowers of its own for which it is notanswerab
le to the central gov
ernment.Both these gov
ernments are separatelyanswerab
le to the people.Let us look at some of the key
features of federalism :1There are two or more levels (ortiers) of gov
ernment.2Different tiers of gov
ernmentgov
ern the same citizens, but each tierhas its own JURISDICTION in specificmatters of legislation, taxation and
administration.3The jurisdictions of the respective
levels or tiers of gov
ernment arespecified in the constitution. So theexistence and authority of each tier ofgov
ernment is constitutionallyguaranteed.4The fundamental provisions ofthe constitution cannot be unilaterallychanged by one level of gov
ernment.Such changes require the consent ofboth the levels of gov
ernment.5Courts have the power to interpretthe constitution and the powers ofdifferent levels of gov
ernment. T
hehighest court acts as an umpire ifdisputes arise between different levelsof gov
ernment in the exercise of theirrespective powers.
6Sources of rev
enue for each levelof gov
ernment are clearly specified toensure its financial autonomy.

16Democratic PoliticsIsn™t thatstrange? Did ourconstitutionmakers not knowabout
federalism? Ordid they wish to
av
oid talkingabout it?Some Nepalese citizens were discussing the proposals on the adoptionof federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of them said:Khag Raj: I don™t like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats fordifferent caste groups as in India.
Sarita:  Ours in not a very big country. We don™t need federalism.Babu Lal: I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they gettheir own state government.Ram Ganesh: I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlierenjoyed by the king will now be exercised by our elected representatives.If you were participating in this conversation what would be your response to eachof these? Which of these reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is?What makes India a federal country?We have earlier seen how smallcountries like Belgium and Sri Lankaface so many problems of managing
diversity. W
hat about a vast country likeIndia, with so many languages, religionsand regions? What are the powersharing arrangements in our country?Let us begin with the Constitution.India had emerged as an independentnation after a painful and bloody
partition. Soon after Independence,several princely states became a part ofthe country. T
he Constitution declaredIndia as a Union of States. 
Although itdid not use the word federation, theIndian Union is based on the principles
of federalism.Let us go back to the seven featuresof federalism mentioned above. W
e cansee that all these features apply to theprovisions of the Indian Constitution.The Constitution originally providedfor a two-tier system of gov
ernment,the Union Government or what we callthe Central Government, representingthe Union of India and the Stategov
ernments. Later, a third tier offederalism was added in the form ofPanchaya
ts and Municipalities. 
As inany federation, these different tiers
enjoy separate jurisdiction.  TheConstitution clearly provided a three-fold distribution of legislative powersbetween the Union Government andthe State Governments. T
hus, itcontains three lists:lUnion List includes subjects ofnational importance such as defenceof the country,
 foreign affairs,
 banking,communications and currency. T
heyare included in this list because we needa uniform policy on these mattersthroughout the country. T
he UnionGovernment alone can make lawsrelating to the subjects mentioned inthe Union List.lState List contains subjects ofState and local importance such aspolice, trade, commerce, agricultureand irrigation. T
he State GovernmentsWhat makes India a federal country?
Federalism
17alone can make laws relating to thesubjects mentioned in the State List.lConcurrent List includes subjectsof common interest to both the UnionGovernment as well as the StateGovernments, such as education, forest,trade unions, marriage,
 adoption andsuccession. Both the Union as well asthe State Governments can make lawson the subjects mentioned in this list.
If their laws conflict with each other,the law made by the UnionGovernment will prev
ail.What about subjects that do notfall in any of the three lists? Or subjects
like computer software that came upafter the constitution was made?According to our constitution, the
Union Government has the power tolegislate on these ‚residuary™ subjects.We noted above that mostfederations that are formed by ‚holdingtogether™ do not give equal power toits constituent units. T
hus, all States inthe Indian Union do not have identicalpowers.
 Some States enjoy a specialstatus. Jammu and Kashmir has its ownConstitution. Many provisions of theIndian Constitution are not applicable
to this State without the approv
al ofthe State Assembly.
 Indians who arenot permanent residents of this Statecannot buy land or house here.
 Similarspecial provisions exist for some otherStates of India as well.If agriculture and
commerce are
state subjects,
why do we have
ministers of
agriculture and
commerce in the
Union cabinet?Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All IndiaRadio daily for one week. Make a list of news items related to government policies ordecisions by classifying these into the following categories:lNews items that relate only to the Central Government,lNews items that relate only to your or any other State Government,lNews items about the relationship between the Central and State Governments.There are some units of the IndianUnion which enjoy very little power.These are areas which are too small tobecome an independent State butwhich could not be merged with anyof the existing States. T
hese areas, likeChandigarh, or Lakshadweep or thecapital city of Delhi, are called UnionTerritories. T
hese territories do nothave the powers of a State. T
he CentralGovernment has special powers inrunning these areas.This sharing of power between theUnion Government and the Stategov
ernments is basic to the structureof the Constitution. It is not easy to
make changes to this power sharingarrangement. T
he Parliament cannoton its own change this arrangement.Any change to it has to be first passedby both the Houses of Parliament withat least two-thirds majority. T
hen it hasto be ratified by the legislatures of atleast half of the total States.The judiciary plays an importantrole in overseeing the implementationof constitutional provisions andprocedures. In case of any dispute aboutthe division of powers,
 the High Courtsand the Supreme Court make a decision.The Union and State gov
ernmentshave the power to raise resources bylevying taxes in order to carry on thegov
ernment and the responsibilitiesassigned to each of them.
18Democratic PoliticslPokharan, the place where India conducted its nuclear tests, liesin Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed tothe Central Government™s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government ofIndia from conducting the nuclear tests?lSuppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools.But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the newtextbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission fromthe Union Government before these textbooks can be launched?lSuppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have
different policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can thePrime Minister of India intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers willhave to obey?
Federalism
19Constitutional provisions are necessaryfor the success of federalism but theseare not sufficient. If the federalexperiment has succeeded in India, itis not merely because of the clearly laid
out constitutional provisions. T
he realsuccess of federalism in India can be
attributed to the nature of democraticpolitics in our country. T
his ensuredthat the spirit of federalism, respectfor diversity and desire for livingtogether became shared ideals in our
country.
 Let us look at some of themajor ways in which this happened.Linguistic StatesThe creation of linguistic States was thefirst and a major test for democratic
politics in our country.
  If you look atthe political map of India when it began
its journey as a democracy in 1947 and
that of 2013, you will be surprised by
the extent of the changes. Many oldStates have vanished and many new
States have been created. Areas,
boundaries and names of the States have
been changed.In 1947, the boundaries of severalold States of India were changed inorder to create new States. T
his wasdone to ensure that people who spokethe same language lived in the sameState. Some States were created not onthe basis of language but to recognisedifferences based on culture,
 ethnicityor geogra
phy. T
hese include States likeNagaland, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.lHas your village/ town/ cityremained under the same Statesince Independence? If not,what was the name of the
earlier State?lCan you identify names of three
States in 1947 that have been
changed later?lIdentify any three States whichhave been carved out ofbigger States.
How is federalism practised?2013Note:Telangana became the 29th State of India on the 2nd June, 2014, after thereorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
20Democratic PoliticsWhen the demand for theformation of States on the basis oflanguage was raised, some nationalleaders feared that it would lead to thedisintegra
tion of the country. T
heCentral Government resisted linguisticStates for some time. But theexperience has shown that theformation of linguistic States hasactually made the country,
 more united.It has also made administration easier.Language policyA second test for Indian federation isthe language policy.
 Our Constitutiondid not give the status of nationallanguage to any one language.
 Hindi wasidentified as the official language.
 ButHindi is the mother tongue of only
about 40 per cent of Indians. T
herefore,
there were many safeguards to protectother languages. Besides Hindi, there are21 other languages recognised asScheduled Languages by theConstitution. A candidate in anexamination conducted for the CentralGov
ernment positions may opt to takethe examination in any of theselanguages. States too have their ownofficial languages. Much of thegov
ernment work takes place in theofficial language of the concerned State.Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of ourcountry adopted a very cautiousattitude in spreading the use of Hindi.
According to the Constitution, the useof English for official purposes was tostop in 1965. Howev
er, many non-Hindi speaking States demanded thatthe use of English  continue. In TamilNadu, this movement took a violentform. T
he Central Governmentresponded by agr
eeing to continue theuse of English along with Hindi forofficial purposes. Many critics thinkthat this solution fav
oured the English-speaking elite. Promotion of Hindicontinues to be the official policy ofthe Government of India. Promotiondoes not mean that the CentralGovernment can impose Hindi onStates where people speak a different
language. T
he flexibility shown byIndian political leaders helped our
country avoid the kind of situation thatSri Lanka finds itself in.Centre-State relationsRestructuring the Centre-Staterelations is one more way in whichfederalism has been strengthened inpractice. How the constitutionalarrangements for sharing power workin reality depends to a large extent onhow the ruling parties and leadersfollo
w these arrangements. For a longtime, the same party ruled both at theCentre and in most of the States. T
hismeant that the State gov
ernments didnot exercise their rights as autonomousfederal units. 
As and when the rulingparty at the State level was different,the parties that ruled at the Centre triedto undermine the power of the States.In those days, the Central Governmentwould often misuse the Constitutionto dismiss the State gov
ernments thatwere controlled by rival parties. T
hisundermined the spirit of federalism.All this changed significantlyafter 1990. T
his period saw the riseof regional political parties in manyStates of the country. T
his was alsothe beginning of the era of
COALITION GOVERNMENTS at theCentre.
 Since no single party got aclear majority in the Lok Sabha, the
major national parties had to enterinto an alliance with many partiesincluding several regional parties toform a gov
ernment at the Centre.
This led to a new culture of powersharing and respect for the autonomyof State Governments. T
his trend wasCoalition government:A gov
ernment formedby the coming togetherof at least two politicalparties. Usually partnersin a coalition form apolitical alliance andadopt a common
progr
amme.Why Hindi?Why notBangla orTelugu?
Federalism
21Here are two cartoons showing the relationship between Centre and States. Should theState go to the Centre with a begging bowl? How can the leader of a coalition keep thepartners of government satisfied?Are yousuggesting thatregionalism is
good for our
democracy? Areyou serious?The States Plead for More Powers© Kutty - Laughing with Kutty© Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of CartoonsPerils of Running a Coalition Governmentsupported by a major judgement ofthe Supreme Court that made itdifficult for the Central Gov
ernmentto dismiss state gov
ernments in anarbitrary manner. T
hus, federalpower sharing is more effective todaythan it was in the early years afterthe Constitution came into force.
22Democratic PoliticsLinguistic diversity of IndiaLinguistic diversity of IndiaLinguistic diversity of IndiaLinguistic diversity of IndiaLinguistic diversity of IndiaHow many languages do we have inIndia? The answer depends on howone counts it. The latestinformation that we have is fromthe Census of India held in 2001.This census recorded more than1500 distinct languages whichpeople mentioned as their mothertongues. These languages weregrouped together under some majorlanguages. For example languageslike Bhojpuri, Magadhi,Bundelkhandi, Chhattisgarhi,Rajasthani, Bhili and many otherswere grouped together under
‚Hindi™. Even after this grouping,the Census found 114 major
languages. Of these 22 languagesare now included in the EighthSchedule of the Indian Constitutionand are therefore called ‚ScheduledLanguages™. Others are called ‚non-Scheduled Languages™. In terms oflanguages, India is perhaps themost diverse country in the world.A look at the enclosed tablemakes it clear that no onelanguage is the mother tongue of
the majority of our population. Thelargest language, Hindi, is the
mother tongue of only about 41per cent Indians. If we add to that
all those who knew Hindi as theirsecond or third language, the totalnumber was still less than 50 percent in 2001. As for English, only0.02 per cent Indians recorded it astheir mother tongue. Another 11per cent knew it as a second orthird language.Read this table carefully, butyou need not memorise it. Just dothe following:lMake a bar or pie chart onthe basis of this information.lPrepare a map of linguisticdiversity of India by shading theregion where each of these
languages is spoken on the mapof India.lFind out about any threelanguages that are spoken inIndia but are not included in this
table.Scheduled Languages of IndiaLanguageProportion ofspeakers (%)Assamese1.28Bengali8.11Bodo0.13Dogri0.22Gujarati4.48Hindi41.03Kannada3.69Kashmiri0.54Konkani0.24Maithili1.18Malayalam3.21Manipuri0.14Marathi6.99Nepali0.28Oriya3.21Punjabi2.83SanskritNSanthali0.63Sindhi0.25Tamil5.91Telugu7.19Urdu5.01* The percentage of speakers of each language for 2001 has beenworked out on the total population of India excluding the population
of Mao-Maram, Paomata and Purul subdivisions of Senapati
district of Manipur due to cancellation of census results.N Š Stands for negligible.Source:http://www.censusindia.gov.in/Census_Data_2001/Census_Data_Online/Language/Statement4.htm+
Federalism
23Read the following excerpts from an article by noted historian,Ramachandra Guha, that appeared in the Times of India on November 1,2006:Take the example of your own state or any other state that was affected bylinguistic reorganisation. Write a short note for or against the argument given bythe author here on the basis of that example.‚‚
24Democratic PoliticsWe noted above that federalgov
ernments have two or more tiersof gov
ernments. W
e have so fardiscussed the two-tiers of gov
ernmentin our country.
 But a vast country likeIndia cannot be run only through thesetwo-tiers.
 States in India are as large asindependent countries of Europe. Interms of population, Uttar Pradesh isbigger than Russia, Maharashtra isabout as big as Germany.
 Many ofthese States are internally very diverse.There is thus a need for power sharingwithin these States. Federal powersharing in India needs another tier ofgov
ernment, below that of the Stategov
ernments. T
his is the rationale fordecentralisation of power. T
hus,resulted a third-tier of gov
ernment,called local gov
ernment.When power is taken awa
y fromCentral and State gov
ernments and givento local gov
ernment, it is calleddecentralisation. T
he basic idea behinddecentralisation is that there are a large
number of problems and issues whichare best settled at the local level. Peoplehave better knowledge of problems intheir localities. T
hey also have better ideason where to spend money and how tomanage things more efficiently.
 Besides,at the local level it is possible for thepeople to directly participate in decisionmaking. T
his helps to inculcate a habitof democratic participation. Localgov
ernment is the best way to realise  oneimportant principle of democracy,
namely local self-gov
ernment.The need for decentralisation wasrecognised in our Constitution. Since
then, there have been several attemptsto decentralise power to the level ofvillages and towns.  Panchaya
ts inSo, we are like athree-tier coachin a train! Ialways prefer thelower berth!villages and municipalities in urbanareas were set up in all the States. Butthese were directly under the controlof state gov
ernments. Elections tothese local gov
ernments were not heldre
gularly.
 Local gov
ernments did nothave any powers or resources of theirown. Thus, there was very littledecentralisation in effective terms.A major step towards decentra-lisation was taken in 1992. T
heConstitution was amended to make thethird-tier of democracy more powerfuland effective.
lNow it is constitutionallymandatory to hold regular elections tolocal gov
ernment bodies.lSeats are reserved in the electedbodies and the executive heads ofthese institutions for the ScheduledCastes, Scheduled Tribes and OtherBackward Classes.lAt least one-third of all positionsare reserved for women.lAn independent institution calledthe State Election Commission hasbeen created in each State to conductpanchaya
t and municipal elections.lThe State gov
ernments are requiredto share some powers and rev
enue withlocal gov
ernment bodies. T
he nature ofsharing varies from State to State.Rural local gov
ernment ispopularly known by the namepanchaya
ti raj. Each village,
 or a groupof villages in some States, has a grampanchaya
t. T
his is a council consistingof several ward members,
 often calledpanch, and a president or sarpanch.They are directly elected by all theadult population living in that wardDecentralisation in India
Federalism
25or village.
 It is the decision-makingbody for the entire village. T
hepanchaya
t works under the overallsupervision of the gram sabha. All thevoters in the village are its members.
It has to meet at least twice or thricein a year to approv
e the annual budgetof the gram panchaya
t and to reviewthe performance of the grampanchaya
t.The local government structuregoes right up to the district level. A
fe
w gram panchaya
ts are groupedtogether to form what is usually calleda panchaya
t samiti or block or mandal.The members of this representative
body are elected by all the panchyat
members in that area. All the panchayat
samitis or mandals in a district togetherconstitute the zilla (district) parishad.
Most members of the zilla parishad are
elected. Members of the Lok Sabha
and MLAs of that district and some
other officials of other district levelbodies are also its members.
 Zillaparishad chairperson is the politicalhead of the zilla parishad.Similarly,
 local gov
ernment bodiesexist for urban areas as well.Municipalities are set up in towns. Bigcities are constituted into municipalcorporations. Both municipalities andmunicipal corporations are controlledby elected bodies consisting of people™sre
presentatives. Municipal chairpersonis the political head of the municipality.In a municipal corporation such anofficer is called the mayor.Prime Minister runsthe country. ChiefMinister runs the
state. Logically,then, thechairperson of ZillaParishad shouldrun the district.
Why does the D.M.or Collector
administer the
district?What do these newspaper clippings have to say about efforts of decentralisation in India?
26Democratic PoliticsThis new system of localgov
ernment is the largest experimentin democracy conducted anywhere inthe world. T
here are now about 36 lakhelected representatives in thepanchaya
ts and municipalities etc., allov
er the country. T
his number is biggerthan the population of many countries
in the world.  Constitutional status forlocal gov
ernment has helped to deependemocracy in our country.
 It has alsoincreased women™s representation andvoice in our democracy. 
At the sametime, there are many difficulties. W
hileelections are held regularly and
enthusiastically,
 gram sabhas are notheld regularly.
 Most state gov
ernmentshave not transferred significant powersto the local gov
ernments. Nor have
they given adequate resources. W
e arethus still a long way from realising theideal of self-gov
ernment.Find out about the local government in the village or town you live in.If you live in a village, find out the names of the following: your panch or wardmember, your sarpanch, your panchayat samiti, the chairperson of your zillaparishad. Also find out when did the last meeting of the gram sabha take place andhow many people took part in that.If you live in urban areas, find out the name of your municipal councillor, and themunicipal chairperson or mayor. Also find out about the budget of your municipalcorporation, municipality and the major items on which money was spent.+An experiment in BrazilA city called Porto Alegre in Brazil has carried out an extraordinary  experimentin combining decentralisation with participative democracy. The city has set up aparallel organisation operating alongside the municipal council, enabling localinhabitants to take real decisions for their city. The nearly 13 lakh people in thiscity get to participate in making the budget for their own city. The city is dividedinto many sectors or what we call wards. Each sector has a meeting, like that ofthe gram sabha, in which anyone living in that area can participate. There aresome meetings to discuss issues that affect the entire city. Any citizen of the citycan participate in those meetings. The budget of the city is discussed in thesemeetings. The proposals are put to the municipality that takes a final decisionabout it.About 20,000 people participate in this decision making exercise every year.This method has ensured that the money cannot be spent only for the benefit ofthe colonies where rich people live. Buses now run to the poor colonies andbuilders cannot evict slum-dwellers without resettling them.In our own country, a similar experiment has taken place in some areas inKerala. Ordinary people have participated in making a plan for the developmentof their locality.

Federalism
27Exercises1.Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India:Manipur, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa.2.Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on ablank outline political map of the world.3.Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in India that issimilar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium.4.What is the main difference between a federal form of governmentand a unitary one? Explain with an example.5.State any two differences between the local government before andafter the Constitutional amendment in 1992.6.Fill in the blanks:Since the United States is a ___________________ type offederation, all the constituent States have equal powers and Statesare ______________vis-à-vis the federal government. But India is a_____________________ type of federation and some States havemore power than others. In India, the ____________ governmenthas more powers.7.Here are three reactions to the language policy followed in India.Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions.Sangeeta: The policy of accommodation has strengthenednational unity.
Arman: Language-based States have divided us by makingeveryone conscious of their language.Harish: This policy has only helped to consolidate thedominance of English over all other languages.8.The distinguishing feature of a federal government is:(a)National government gives some powers to the provincialgovernments.(b)Power is distributed among the legislature, executive andjudiciary.(c)Elected officials exercise supreme power in the government.(d)Governmental power is divided between different levels ofgovernment.9.A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are givenhere. Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists asprovided in the table below.A.Defence; B. Police; C. Agriculture; D. Education;E.Banking; F. Forests; G. Communications; H. Trade; I. MarriagesUnion List
State List
Concurrent List
28Democratic Politics1234
(a)DAB
C(b)BCDA
(c)ACDB
(d)CDAB
(a) State governmentState List(b) Central governmentUnion List(c) Central and State governmentsConcurrent List(d) Local governmentsResiduary powersExercises10.Examine the following pairs that give the level of government inIndia and the powers of the government at that level to make lawson the subjects mentioned against each. Which of the following pairsis not correctly matched?11.Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using
the codes given below the lists:List IList II1. Union of IndiaA. Prime Minister2. StateB. Sarpanch3. Municipal CorporationC. Governor4. Gram PanchayatD. Mayor12.Consider the following two statements.
A.In a federation the powers of the federal and provincialgovernments are clearly demarcated.B.India is a federation because the powers of the Union and StateGovernments are specified in the Constitution and they have
exclusive jurisdiction on their respective subjects.C.Sri Lanka is a federation because the country is divided intoprovinces.D.
India is no longer a federation because some powers of the Stateshave been devolved to the local government bodies.Which of the statements given above are correct?(a) A, B and C   (b) A, C and D   (c) A and B only   (d) B and C only
