NOTES FOR THE TEACHERCHAPTER 2:   SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMYAn economy is best understood when westudy its components or sectors. Sectoral
classification can be done on the basis ofseveral criteria. In this chapter, threetypes of classifications are discussed:primary/secondary/tertiary; organised/
unorganised; and public/private. You cancreate a discussion about these types bytaking examples familiar to the studentsand relate them to their daily life. It is
important to emphasise the changing
roles of sectors. This can be highlighted
further by drawing attention of thestudents to the rapid growth of servicesector. While elaborating the ideasprovided in the chapter, the students mayneed to be familiarised with a few
fundamental concepts such as GrossDomestic Product, Employment etc. Sincethe students may find this difficult to
understand, it is necessary to explain to
them through examples. Several activities
and exercises are suggested in the chapterto help the students understand how aperson™s activity could be placed Š
whether in the primary, secondary or
tertiary, organised or unorganised, and
public or private sector. You mayencourage the students to talk to various
working people around them (such as
shop owners, casual workers, vegetable
vendors, workshop mechanics, domestic
workers etc.) to know more about how theylive and work. Based on such information,the students can be encouraged to develop
their own classification of economic
activities.Another important issue to behighlighted is about the problems caused
by the changes in the roles of sectors.
The chapter has taken the example ofunemployment and what the governmentcan do to solve it. The declining importanceof agriculture and growing importance of
industry and services should be related
to the experience of the children by takingmore examples that they may observe intheir day-to-day life. Information derivedfrom the media could be used for this
purpose. You may encourage the studentsto bring important cuttings and stories
from newspapers, which could be
prominently displayed in storyboards, and
encourage the class to discuss these
issues. While discussing the unorganised
sector, the key issue of protecting theworkers engaged in the sector should be
highlighted. You may  also encourage thestudents to visit persons and enterprises
in the unorganised sector and get a first
hand experience from real life situation.Sources for InformationThe GDP data used in this chapterpertaining to Gross Domestic Product at
Factor Cost by Industry of Origin at
2004-05 prices is taken from EconomicSurvey 2011. It is a valuable source of GDPand other information relating to the Indian
economy. For evaluation purposes,
particularly to develop the analytical ability
of learners, teachers can refer to EconomicSurvey to get data for different years.The employment figures are based ondata taken from the five-yearly surveys
on employment and unemployment
conducted by the National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO). NSSO is an
organisation under the Ministry of
Statistics, Planning and Programme
Implementation, Government of India.
The website you can log onto is:
http:/mospi.nic.in. Employment data is alsoavailable from other sources such as
Census of India.  
  
 UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT1818
1818
18
SECTORSOF THE INDIAN ECONOMYCHAPTER 2SECTORS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIESLet us look at these pictures. You will find that people areengaged in various economic activities. Some of these areactivities producing goods. Some others are producing
services. These activities are happening around us every
minute even as we speak.  How do we understand theseactivities? One way of doing this is to group them (classifythem) using some important criterion. These groups are also
called sectors.
  
  
 UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT2020
2020
20There are many activities that areundertaken by directly using
natural resources. Take, for
example, the cultivation of cotton. It
takes place within a crop season. For
the growth of the cotton plant, wedepend mainly, but not entirely,on natural factors like rainfall,sunshine and climate. The product
of this activity, cotton, is a natural
product. Similarly, in the case of an
activity like dairy, we are dependenton the biological process of
the animals and availability
of fodder etc. The producthere, milk, also is a naturalproduct. Similarly, mineralsand ores are also naturalproducts. When we produce
a good by exploiting natural
resources, it is an activity ofthe primary sector. Whyprimary? This is because itforms the base for all
other products that we
subsequently make. Since
most of the natural
products we get are from
agriculture, dairy, fishing,
forestry, this sector is alsocalled agriculture and relatedsector.The secondary sector coversactivities in which natural productsare changed into other forms through
ways of manufacturing that we
associate with industrial activity. It is
the next step after primary. The
product is not produced by nature
but has to be made and therefore
some process of manufacturing is
essential. This could be in a factory, a
workshop or at home.  For example,
using cotton fibre from the plant, wespin yarn and weave cloth. Using
sugarcane as a raw material, we make
sugar or gur. We convert earth intobricks and use bricks to make houses
and buildings. Since this sector
gradually became associated with the
different kinds of industries that came
up, it is also called as industrial sector.After primary and secondary, thereis a third category of activities that fallsunder tertiary sector and is differentfrom the above two. These areactivities that help in the development
of the primary and secondary sectors.
These activities, by themselves, do not
produce a good but they are an aid
or a support for the production
process. For example, goods that are
produced in the primary or secondary
sector would need to be transported
by trucks or trains and then sold in
wholesale and retail shops. At times,
it may be necessary to store these in
godowns. We also may need to talk toothers over telephone or send letters
(communication) or borrow money
from banks (banking) to help
production and trade. Transport,storage, communication, banking,
trade are some examples of tertiary
activities. Since these activities
generate services rather than goods,
the tertiary sector is also called theservice sector.Service sector also includes someessential services that may not directlyhelp in the production of goods. For
example, we require teachers, doctors,
and those who provide personal
services such as washermen, barbers,
cobblers, lawyers, and people to do
administrative and accounting works.
In recent times, certain new services
based on information technology such
as internet cafe, ATM booths, call
centres, software companies etc have
become important.Tertiary(Service)SectorPrimary(Agriculture)SectorSecondary(Industrial)Sectorproducesnaturalgoodsproducesmanufacturedgoodshelps to developother sectorsWe begin by looking at differentkind of economic activities.
SS
SS
SECTORSECTORS
ECTORSECTORS
ECTORS  
  
 OFOF
OFOF
OF  
  
 THETHE
THETHE
THE I I
 I I
 INDIANNDIAN
NDIANNDIAN
NDIAN E E
 E E
 ECONOMYCONOMYCONOMYCONOMYCONOMY2121

2121
21EXAMPLEImagine what would happen if farmersrefuse to sell sugarcane to a particularsugar mill. The mill will have to shutdown.Imagine what would happen to cottoncultivation if companies decide not tobuy from the Indian market and importall cotton they need from other
countries. Indian cotton cultivation will
become less profitable and the farmersmay even go bankrupt, if they cannotquickly switch to other crops. Cotton
prices will fall.Farmers buy many goods such astractors, pumpsets, electricity,pesticides and fertilisers. Imagine whatwould happen if the price of fertilisersor pumpsets go up. Cost of cultivationof the farmers will rise and their profits
will be reduced.People working in industrial and servicesector need food. Imagine what wouldhappen if there is a strike bytransporters and lorries refuse to take
vegetables, milk, etc. from rural areas.Food will become scarce in urban areaswhereas farmers will be unable to sell
their products.1. Complete the above table to show how sectors are dependent on each other.2. Explain the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors usingexamples other than those mentioned in the text.3. Classify the following list of occupations under primary, secondary and tertiary sectors:LET™S WORK THESE OUTWHAT DOES THIS SHOW?This is an example of the secondary or
industrial sector being dependent on
the primary.ŁTailorŁBasket weaverŁFlower cultivatorŁMilk vendorŁFishermenŁPriestŁCourierŁWorkers in match factoryŁMoney lenderŁGardenerŁPotterŁBee-keeperŁAstronautŁCall centre employee4. Students in a school are often classified into primary and secondary or junior andsenior. What is the criterion that is used? Do you think this is a useful classification?Discuss.TABLE 2.1EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIESEconomic activities, though, are grouped into three different categories,are highly interdependent. Let us look at some examples.
