177Novels, Society and HistoryNovels,  Society  
and  HistoryChapter VIIINovels, Society and HistoryIn the previous chapter you read about the rise of print culture andhow new forms of communication reshaped the way people thought
about themselves or related to each other. You also saw how print

culture created the possibility of new forms of literature. In this
chapter we will study the history of one such form Œ the novel Œ a
history that is closely connected to the making of modern ways of
thinking. We will first look at the history of the novel in the West,
and then see how this form developed in some of the regions of
India. As you will see, despite their differences, there were many
commonalites of focus between novels written in different partsof the world.

India and the Contemporary World178The novel is a modern form of literature. It is born from print, a
mechanical invention.We cannot think of the novel without the printed book. In ancient
times, as you have seen (Chapter 7), manuscripts were handwritten.These circulated among very few people. In contrast, because of
being printed, novels were widely read and became popular very
quickly. At this time big cities like London were growing rapidly
and becoming connected to small towns and rural areas through
print and improved communications. Novels produced a number
of common interests among their scattered and varied readers. As
readers were drawn into the story and identified with the lives of
fictitious characters, they could think about issues such as therelationship between love and marriage, the proper conduct formen and women, and so on.The novel first took firm root in England and France. Novels began
to be written from the seventeenth century, but they really flowered
from the eighteenth century. New groups of lower-middle-class
people such as shopkeepers and clerks, along with the traditionalaristocratic and gentlemanly classes in England and France now
formed the new readership for novels.
As readership grew and the market for books expanded, the earningsof authors increased. This freed them from financial dependence
on the patronage of aristocrats, and gave them independence toexperiment with different literary styles.  Henry Fielding, a novelist
of the early eighteenth century, claimed he was ‚the founder of a

new province of writing™ where he could make his own laws. The
novel allowed  flexibility in the form of writing. Walter Scott
remembered and collected popular Scottish ballads which he used
in his historical novels about the wars between Scottish clans. The
epistolary
 novel, on the other hand, used the private and personal
form of letters to tell its story. Samuel Richardson™s  
Pamela
,  written
in the eighteenth century, told much of its story through an exchange
of letters between two lovers. These letters tell the reader of the
hidden conflicts in the heroine™s mind.
1.1 The Publishing MarketFor a long time the publishing market excluded the poor. Initially,
novels did not come cheap. Henry Fielding™s 
Tom Jones
 (1749) was
1 The Rise of the NovelNew wordsGentlemanly classes Œ People who claimednoble birth and high social position. They weresupposed to set the standard for properbehaviour
Epistolary Œ Written in the form of a series of
letters
179Novels, Society and Historyissued in six volumes priced at three shillings each Œ which wasmore than what a labourer earned in a week.But soon, people had easier access to books with the introductionof circulating libraries in 1740. Technological improvements in
printing brought down the price of books and innovations in
marketing led to expanded sales. In France, publishers found that
they could make super profits by hiring out novels by the hour. The
novel was one of the first mass-produced items to be sold. There
were several reasons for its popularity. The worlds created by novels
were absorbing and believable, and seemingly real. While readingnovels, the reader was transported to another person™s world, and

began looking at life as it was experienced by the characters of thenovel. Besides, novels allowed individuals the pleasure of reading inprivate, as well as the joy of publicly reading or discussing stories
with friends or relatives. In rural areas people would collect to hear
one of them reading a novel aloud, often becoming deeply involvedin the lives of the characters. Apparently, a group at Slough in England

were very pleased to hear that Pamela, the heroine of Richardson™s
popular novel, had got married in their village. They rushed out tothe parish church and began to ring the church bells!In 1836 a notable event took place when Charles Dickens™s 
Pickwick
Papers
 was 
serialised in a magazine. Magazines were attractive since
they were illustrated and cheap. Serialisation allowed readers to relish
the suspense, discuss the characters of a novel and live for weekswith their stories Œ like viewers of television soaps today!New wordsSerialised Œ A format in which the story is
published in instalments, each part in a new
issue of a journalFig. 2 Œ Library notice.Fig. 2 Œ Library notice.Fig. 2 Œ Library notice.Fig. 2 Œ Library notice.Fig. 2 Œ Library notice.Libraries were well publicised.Fig.Fig.Fig.Fig.Fig. 1 1 1 1 1 Œ Œ Œ Œ Œ     Cover page of  
Cover page of  
Cover page of  
Cover page of  
Cover page of  
Sketches by ‚Boz™.Sketches by ‚Boz™.Sketches by ‚Boz™.Sketches by ‚Boz™.Sketches by ‚Boz™.Charles Dickens™s first publication was a collection of
journalistic essays entitled  Sketches by ‚Boz™ (1836).
Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. 33333 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
Cover page of Cover page of Cover page of Cover page of Cover page of All All All All All The The The The The Year Round.Year Round.Year Round.Year Round.Year Round.The most important feature of the magazineAll the Year Round, edited by CharlesDickens, was his serialised novels. Thisparticular issue begins with one.
India and the Contemporary World180Explain what is meant by the following types ofnovels:
Epistolary novelSerialised novelFor each type, name one writer who wrote in
that style.Discuss1.2 The World of the NovelMore than other forms of writing which came before, novels are
about ordinary people. They do not focus on the lives of great
people or actions that change the destinies of states and empires.
Instead, they are about the everyday life of common people.In the nineteenth century, Europe entered the industrial age.
Factories came up, business profits increased and the economy grew.
But at the same time, workers faced problems. Cities expanded
in an unregulated way and were filled with overworked and
underpaid workers. The unemployed poor roamed the streets for
jobs, and the homeless were forced to seek shelter in workhouses.
The growth of industry was accompanied by an economic
philosophy which celebrated the pursuit of profit and undervalued
the lives of workers. Deeply critical of these developments, novelists
such as Charles Dickens wrote about the terrible effects of
industrialisation on people™s lives and characters. His novel 
Hard Times(1854) describes Coketown, a fictitious industrial town, as a grimplace full of machinery, smoking chimneys, rivers polluted purple

and buildings that all looked the same. Here workers are knownas ‚hands™, as if they had no identity other than as operators
of machines. Dickens criticised not just the greed for profits but

also the ideas that reduced human beings into simple instrumentsof production.Fig. 4 Œ Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910).Fig. 4 Œ Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910).Fig. 4 Œ Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910).Fig. 4 Œ Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910).Fig. 4 Œ Leo Tolstoy (1828-1910).Tolstoy was a famous Russian novelist who wrote extensively onrural life and community.Fig. 5 Œ Charles DickensFig. 5 Œ Charles DickensFig. 5 Œ Charles DickensFig. 5 Œ Charles DickensFig. 5 Œ Charles Dickens(1812-1870).(1812-1870).(1812-1870).(1812-1870).(1812-1870).
181Novels, Society and HistoryIn other novels too, Dickens focused on the terrible conditions of
urban life under industrial capitalism. His Oliver Twist (1838) is the
tale of a poor orphan who lived in a world of petty criminals andbeggars. Brought up in a cruel workhouse (see Fig. 6), Oliver was
finally adopted by a wealthy man and lived happily ever after.

But not all novels about the lives of the poor gave readers the comfortof a happy ending. Emile Zola™s 
Germinal
 (1885) on
the life of a young miner in France explores in harsh detail the
grim conditions of miners™ lives. It ends on a note of despair: the
strike the hero leads fails, his co-workers turn against him, andhopes are shattered.1.3 Community and SocietyThe vast majority of readers of the novel lived in the city. The novel
created in them a feeling of connection with the fate of rural
communities. The nineteenth-century British novelist Thomas Hardy,
for instance, wrote about traditional rural communities of EnglandFig. Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. 66666 Œ 
A hungry Oliver asks for moreA hungry Oliver asks for moreA hungry Oliver asks for moreA hungry Oliver asks for moreA hungry Oliver asks for morefood while other children at the workhousefood while other children at the workhousefood while other children at the workhousefood while other children at the workhousefood while other children at the workhouselook look look look look on on on on on with fearwith fearwith fearwith fearwith fear, illustration in , illustration in , illustration in , illustration in , illustration in OliverOliverOliverOliverOliverTwistTwistTwistTwistTwist.....Fig. 7 Œ Emile ZolaFig. 7 Œ Emile ZolaFig. 7 Œ Emile ZolaFig. 7 Œ Emile ZolaFig. 7 Œ Emile Zola,,,,, painting by Edward Manet,painting by Edward Manet,painting by Edward Manet,painting by Edward Manet,painting by Edward Manet,1868.1868.1868.1868.1868.Manet™s portrait of the French author Zola,showing the novelist at his worktable in anintimate and thoughtful relationship with books.
India and the Contemporary World182that were fast vanishing. This was actually a time when large farmers
fenced off land, bought machines and employed labourers toproduce for the market. The old rural culture with its independentfarmers was dying out. We get a sense of this change in Hardy™s

Mayor of Casterbridge (1886). It is about Michael Henchard, a successful
grain merchant, who becomes the mayor of the farming town of
Casterbridge. He is an independent-minded man who follows his
own style in conducting business. He can also be both unpredictably
generous and cruel with his employees. Consequently, he is no
match for his manager and rival Donald Farfrae who runs his
business on efficient managerial lines and is well regarded for heis smooth and even-tempered with everyone. We can see that
Hardy mourns the loss of the more personalised world that is
disappearing, even as he is aware of its problems and the advantagesof the new order.
The novel uses the 
vernacular
, the language that is spoken by
common people. By coming closer to the different spoken languagesof the people, the novel produces the sense of a shared worldbetween diverse people in a nation. Novels also draw from differentstyles of  language. A novel may take a classical language and combine
it with the language of the streets and make them all a part of the
vernacular that it uses. Like the nation, the novel brings together
many cultures.
1.4 The New WomanThe most exciting element of the novel was the involvement of
women. The eighteenth century saw the middle classes becomemore prosperous. Women got more leisure to read as well as write

novels. And novels began exploring the world of women Œ their
emotions and identities, their experiences and problems.
Many novels were about domestic life Œ a theme about whichwomen were allowed to speak with authority. They drew
upon their experience, wrote about family life and earnedpublic recognition.New wordsVernacular Œ The normal, spoken form of a language rather
than the formal, literary form
Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. 88888 Œ Thomas Hardy (1840-1928).
 Œ Thomas Hardy (1840-1928).
 Œ Thomas Hardy (1840-1928).
 Œ Thomas Hardy (1840-1928).
 Œ Thomas Hardy (1840-1928).

183Novels, Society and HistoryFig. Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. 99999 Œ A girl reading, a painting by Jean Renoir (1841-1919).
 Œ A girl reading, a painting by Jean Renoir (1841-1919).
 Œ A girl reading, a painting by Jean Renoir (1841-1919).
 Œ A girl reading, a painting by Jean Renoir (1841-1919).
 Œ A girl reading, a painting by Jean Renoir (1841-1919).
By the nineteenth century, images of women reading silently, in
the privacy of the room, became common in European paintings.Fig. 1Fig. 1Fig. 1Fig. 1Fig. 100000 Œ The home of a woman author
 Œ The home of a woman author
 Œ The home of a woman author
 Œ The home of a woman author
 Œ The home of a woman author
, by George Cruikshank, by George Cruikshank, by George Cruikshank, by George Cruikshank, by George Cruikshank.....When women began writing novels many people feared that they would nowneglect their traditional role as wives and mothers and homes would be in disorder.
India and the Contemporary World184The novels of Jane Austen give us a glimpse of the world of womenin genteel rural society in early-nineteenth-century Britain. They
make us think about a society which encouraged women to lookfor ‚good™ marriages and find wealthy or propertied husbands. The
first sentence of Jane Austen™s 
Pride and Prejudice
 states: ‚It is a truth
universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a goodfortune, must be in want of a wife.™ This observation allows us to
see the behaviour of the main characters, who are preoccupied with
marriage and money, as typifying Austen™s society.
But women novelists did not simply popularise the domestic roleof women. Often their novels dealt with women who broke
established norms of society before adjusting to them. Such stories
allowed women readers to sympathise with rebellious actions. In
Charlotte Bronte™s 
Jane Eyre, 
published in 1847, young Jane is shown
as independent and assertive. While girls of her time were expectedto be quiet and well behaved, Jane at the age of ten protests againstthe hypocrisy of her elders with startling bluntness. She tells her
Fig. 11 Œ Jane AustenFig. 11 Œ Jane AustenFig. 11 Œ Jane AustenFig. 11 Œ Jane AustenFig. 11 Œ Jane Austen(1775-1817).(1775-1817).(1775-1817).(1775-1817).(1775-1817).Fig. 12 Œ The marriage contract, William Hogarth (1697-1764).
Fig. 12 Œ The marriage contract, William Hogarth (1697-1764).
Fig. 12 Œ The marriage contract, William Hogarth (1697-1764).
Fig. 12 Œ The marriage contract, William Hogarth (1697-1764).
Fig. 12 Œ The marriage contract, William Hogarth (1697-1764).
As you can see, the two men in the foreground are busy with the signing of the marriagecontract while the woman stays in the background.

185Novels, Society and HistoryWomen novelistsGeorge Eliot (1819-1880) was the pen-name of Mary Ann Evans.A very popular novelist, she believed that novels gave women a
special opportunity to express themselves freely. Every woman

could see herself as capable of writing fiction:‚Fiction is a department of literature in which women can, aftertheir kind, fully equal men – No educational restrictions can shut
women from the materials of fiction, and there is no species of art
that is so free from rigid requirements.™
George Eliot, ‚Silly novels by lady novelists™, 1856.
Box 11.5 Novels for the YoungNovels for young boys idealised a new type of man:  someone
who was powerful, assertive, independent and daring. Most of these

novels were full of adventure set in places remote from Europe.The colonisers appear heroic and honourable Œ confronting ‚native™peoples and strange surroundings, adapting to native life as well as
changing it, colonising territories and then developing nations there.Books like R.L. Stevenson™s 
Treasure Island
 (1883) or Rudyard Kipling™s
Jungle Book
 (1894) became great hits.
G.A. Henty™s historical adventure novels for boys were also wildly
popular during the height of the British empire. They aroused theexcitement and adventure of conquering strange lands. They were

set in Mexico, Alexandria, Siberia and many other countries. They
were always about young boys who witness grand historical events,get involved in some military action and show what they called
‚English™ courage.Love stories written for adolescent girls also first became popularin this period, especially in the US, notably 
Ramona
 (1884) by Helen
Hunt Jackson and a series entitled 
What Katy Did
 (1872) by Sarah
Chauncey Woolsey, who wrote under the pen-name Susan Coolidge.
G.A. Henty (1832-1902):In Under Drake™s Flag (1883) two youngElizabethan adventurers face their apparently
approaching death, but still remember to assert
their Englishness:‚Well, Ned, we have had more good fortune thanwe could have expected. We might have been
killed on the day when we landed, and we have
spent six jolly months in wandering together as
hunters on the plain. If we must die, let us
behave like Englishmen and Christians.™
Box 2Fig. 13 Œ Charlotte Bronte (1816-1855).Fig. 13 Œ Charlotte Bronte (1816-1855).Fig. 13 Œ Charlotte Bronte (1816-1855).Fig. 13 Œ Charlotte Bronte (1816-1855).Fig. 13 Œ Charlotte Bronte (1816-1855).Aunt who is always unkind to her: ‚People think you a good woman,but you are bad ... You are deceitful! I will never call you aunt as
long as I live.™

India and the Contemporary World1861.6 Colonialism and AfterThe novel originated in Europe at a time when it was colonising therest of the world. The early novel contributed to colonialism bymaking the readers feel they were part of a superior community of
fellow colonialists. The hero of Daniel Defoe™s 
Robinson Crusoe
 (1719)
is an adventurer and slave trader. Shipwrecked on an island, Crusoe
treats coloured people not as human beings equal to him, but as
inferior creatures. He rescues a ‚native™ and makes him his slave. He
does not ask for his name but arrogantly gives him the name Friday.
But at the time, Crusoe™s behaviour was not seen as unacceptable or

odd, for most writers of the time saw colonialism as natural.Colonised people were seen as primitive and barbaric, less thanhuman; and colonial rule was considered necessary to civilise them,
to make them fully human. It was only later, in the twentieth century,
that writers like Joseph Conrad (1857-1924) wrote novels thatshowed the darker side of colonial occupation.The colonised, however, believed that the novel allowed them toexplore their own identities and problems, their own nationalconcerns. Let us see how the novel became popular in India and

what significance it had for society.

187Novels, Society and History2  The Novel Comes to IndiaStories in prose were not new to India. Banabhatta™s 
Kadambari,written in Sanskrit in the seventh century, is an early example. The

Panchatantra is another. There was also a long tradition of prose
tales of adventure and heroism in Persian and Urdu, known as dastan.
However, these works were not novels as we know them today.
The modern novel form developed in India in the nineteenth century,
as Indians became familiar with the Western novel. The development
of the vernaculars, print and a reading public helped in this process.

Some of the earliest Indian novels were written in Bengali andMarathi. The earliest novel in Marathi was Baba Padmanji™s 
Yamuna
Paryatan
 (1857), which used a simple style of storytelling to speak
about the plight of widows. This was followed by Lakshman
Moreshwar Halbe™s 
Muktamala (1861). This was not a realistic novel;
it presented an imaginary ‚romance™ narrative with a moral purpose.Leading novelists of the nineteenth century wrote for a cause.
Colonial rulers regarded the contemporary culture of India as inferior.
On the other hand, Indian novelists wrote to develop a modern

literature of the country that could produce a sense of nationalbelonging and cultural equality with their colonial masters.
Translations of novels into different regional languages helped to
spread the popularity of the novel and stimulated the growth ofthe novel in new areas.
2.1 The Novel in South IndiaNovels began appearing in south Indian languages during the periodof colonial rule. Quite a few early novels came out of attempts totranslate English novels into Indian languages. For example,

O. Chandu Menon, a subjudge from Malabar, tried to translate an
English novel called 
Henrietta Temple
 written by Benjamin Disraeli
into Malayalam. But he quickly realised that his readers in Kerala
were not familiar with the way in which the characters in Englishnovels lived:  their clothes, ways of speaking, and manners were
unknown to them. They would find a direct translation of an English
novel dreadfully boring. So, he gave up this idea and wrote instead
a story in Malayalam in the ‚manner of English novel books™. Thisdelightful novel called Indulekha, published in 1889, was the firstmodern novel in Malayalam.Not all Marathi novels were realistic. Naro SadashivRisbud used a highly ornamental style in his Marathi
novel Manjughosha (1868). This novel was filled
with amazing events. Risbud had a reason behind
his choice of style. He said:‚Because of our attitude to marriage and forseveral other reasons one finds in the lives of theHindus neither interesting views nor virtues – Ifwe write about things that we experience
daily there would be nothing enthralling about
them, so that if we set out to write an

entertaining book we are forced to take up with
the marvellous.™
Box 3Fig. 14 Œ Chandu MenonFig. 14 Œ Chandu MenonFig. 14 Œ Chandu MenonFig. 14 Œ Chandu MenonFig. 14 Œ Chandu Menon(1847-1899).(1847-1899).(1847-1899).(1847-1899).(1847-1899).
India and the Contemporary World188The case of Andhra Pradesh was strikingly similar. Kandukuri
Viresalingam (1848-1919) began translating Oliver Goldsmith™s 
Vicarof Wakefield
  into Telugu. He abandoned this plan for similar reasons
and instead wrote an original Telugu novel called 
Rajasekhara Caritamu
in 1878.2.2 The Novel in HindiIn the north, Bharatendu Harishchandra, the pioneer of modernHindi literature, encouraged many members of his circle of poets
and writers to recreate and translate novels from other languages.
Many novels were actually translated and adapted from English andBengali under his influence, but the first proper modern novel was
written by Srinivas Das of Delhi.Srinivas Das™s novel, published in 1882, was titled 
Pariksha-Guru
 (The
Master Examiner). It cautioned young men of well-to-do families
against the dangerous influences of bad company and consequentloose morals.
Pariksha-Guru
 reflects the inner and outer world of the newly emerging
middle classes. The characters in the novel are caught in the difficulty
of adapting to colonised society and at the same time preserving
Fig. 15 Œ Image from Fig. 15 Œ Image from Fig. 15 Œ Image from Fig. 15 Œ Image from Fig. 15 Œ Image from Pickwick Abroad.Pickwick Abroad.Pickwick Abroad.Pickwick Abroad.Pickwick Abroad.A drawing from the book Pickwick Abroad written by
G.W.M. Reynolds.Minor nineteenth-century English novelists like Reynolds,F. Marion Crawford and Marie Corelli were hugely popular incolonial India. Their novels Œ which were historical romances,adventure stories and sensation novels Œ were easily availableand were translated and ‚adapted™ into several Indian languages.Reynolds™s Pickwick Abroad (1839) 
was more popular in Indiathan Dickens™s original Pickwick Papers (1837)
.
189Novels, Society and Historytheir own cultural identity. The world of colonial modernity seems
to be both frightening and irresistible to the characters. The novel

tries to teach the reader the ‚right way™ to live and expects all ‚sensible
men™ to be worldly-wise and practical, to remain rooted in the
values of their own tradition and culture, and to live with dignity
and honour.
In the novel we see the characters attempting to bridge two differentworlds through their actions: they take to new agricultural technology,

modernise trading practices, change the use of Indian languages,
making them capable of transmitting both Western sciences and

Indian wisdom. The young are urged to cultivate the ‚healthy habit™
of reading the newspapers. But the novel emphasises that all

this must be achieved without sacrificing the traditional values of
the middle-class household. With all its good intentions, 
Pariksha-
Guru could not win many readers, as it was perhaps too moralising
in its style.The writings of Devaki Nandan Khatri created a novel-readingpublic in Hindi. His best-seller, Chandrakanta Œ a romance with
dazzling elements of fantasy Œ is believed to have contributed
immensely in popularising the Hindi language and the Nagari
script among the educated classes of those times. Although it was

apparently written purely for the ‚pleasure of reading™, this novel
also gives some interesting insights into the fears and desires of its
reading public.It was with the writing of Premchand that the Hindi novel achieved
excellence. He began writing in Urdu and then shifted to Hindi,
remaining an immensely influential writer in both languages. He drew

on the traditional art of kissa-goi  (storytelling).  Many critics think
that his novel 
Sewasadan
 (The Abode of Service), published in 1916,
lifted the Hindi novel from the realm of fantasy, moralising and

simple entertainment to a serious reflection on the lives of ordinary
people and social issues. 
Sewasadan
 deals mainly with the poor
condition of women in society. Issues like child marriage and dowry

are woven into the story of the novel.  It also tells us about the ways
in which the Indian upper classes used whatever little opportunitiesthey got from colonial authorities to govern themselves.
2.3 Novels in BengalIn the nineteenth century, the early Bengali novels lived in two worlds.
Many of these novels were located in the past, their characters, events
Write about two important characteristics of the
early Hindi novel.DiscussThe novel in AssamThe first novels in Assam were written bymissionaries. Two of them were translations of

Bengali including Phulmoni and Karuna
. In 1888,Assamese students in Kolkata formed the Asamya
Bhasar Unnatisadhan that brought out a journal
called Jonaki
. This journal opened up theopportunities for new authors to develop the
novel. Rajanikanta Bardoloi wrote the first major
historical novel in Assam called Manomati (1900).
It is set in the Burmese invasion, stories of which
the author had probably heard from old soldiers
who had fought in the 1819 campaign. It is a
tale of two lovers belonging to two hostile families
who are separated by the war and finally
reunited.Box 4
India and the Contemporary World190and love stories based on historical events. Another group of novels
depicted the inner world of domestic life in contemporary settings.
Domestic novels frequently dealt with the social problems andromantic relationships between men and women.The old merchant elite of Calcutta patronised public forms of
entertainment such as kabirlarai (poetry contests), musical soirees
and dance performances. In contrast, the new bhadralok found

himself at home in the more private world of reading novels.
Novels were read individually. They could also be read in select
groups. Sometimes the household of the great Bangla novelist

Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay would host a jatra in the courtyard
where members of the family would be gathered. In Bankim™s room,
however, a group of literary friends would collect to read, discuss
and judge literary works. Bankim read out 
Durgeshnandini
 (1865),his first novel, to such a gathering of people who were stunned to
realise that the Bengali novel had achieved excellence so quickly.
Besides the ingenious twists and turns of the plot and the suspense,the novel was also relished for its language. The prose style becamea new object of enjoyment. Initially the Bengali novel used a colloquialstyle associated with urban life. It also used meyeli, the language
associated with women™s speech. This style was quickly replaced

by Bankim™s prose which was Sanskritised but also contained a
more vernacular style.The novel rapidly acquired popularity in Bengal. By the twentiethcentury, the power of telling stories in simple language made Sarat
Chandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938) the most popular novelist inBengal and probably in the rest of India.The Oriya novelIn 1877-78, Ramashankar Ray, a dramatist, began
serialising the first Oriya novel, Saudamani. But
he could not complete it. Within thirty years,

however, Orissa produced a major novelist in Fakir

Mohon Senapati (1843-1918). The title of his
novel Chaa Mana Atha Guntha (1902) translates
as six acres and thirty-two decimals of land. It
announces a new kind of novel that will deal with
the question of land and its possession. It is the
story of Ramchandra Mangaraj, a landlord™s
manager who cheats his idle and drunken master
and then eyes the plot of fertile land owned by
Bhagia and Shariya, a childless weaver couple.
Mangaraj fools this couple and puts them into his
debt so that he can take over their land. This
pathbreaking work showed that  the novel could

make rural issues an important part of urban
preoccupations. In writing this novel, Fakir Mohon

anticipated a host of writers in Bengal and
elsewhere.Box 5Fig. 1
Fig. 1Fig. 1
Fig. 1Fig. 177777     Œ The temple and the drawing room.
 The temple and the drawing room.
 The temple and the drawing room.
 The temple and the drawing room.
 The temple and the drawing room.
On the right is the temple where the family and others would gatherand on the left is the drawing room where Bankim would entertainselect friends to discuss new literary works. Note that the twospaces Œ the traditional and the modern Œ are next to each other,indicating the split lifestyle of most intellectuals in colonial India.
Fig. 16 Fig. 16 Fig. 16 Fig. 16 Fig. 16 Œ Bankim Chandra  Chattopadhyay
 Bankim Chandra  Chattopadhyay
 Bankim Chandra  Chattopadhyay
 Bankim Chandra  Chattopadhyay
 Bankim Chandra  Chattopadhyay
(1838-1894).(1838-1894).(1838-1894).(1838-1894).(1838-1894).Bankim™s hands on the book indicates howwriting was the basis of his social positionand authority.
191Novels, Society and History3  Novels in the Colonial WorldThe message of reformMany early novels carried a clear message ofsocial reform. For example, in Indirabai, aKannada novel written by Gulavadi Venkata Rao

in 1899, the heroine is given away in marriage
at a very young age to an elderly man. Her
husband dies soon after, and she is forced to

lead the life of a widow. In spite of opposition
from her family and society, Indirabai succeeds

in continuing her education. Eventually she
marries again, this time a progressive, English-
educated man. Women™s education, the plight
of widows, and problems created by the early
marriage of girls Œ all these were important issuesfor social reformers in Karnataka at that time.Box 6Fig. 18 Œ  Cover page of the novel
Fig. 18 Œ  Cover page of the novel
Fig. 18 Œ  Cover page of the novel
Fig. 18 Œ  Cover page of the novel
Fig. 18 Œ  Cover page of the novel
Indirabai.Indirabai.Indirabai.Indirabai.Indirabai.Written at the end of the nineteenthcentury, Indirabai continues to be
popular and is regularly reprinted. Thisis the cover of a recent reprint.
If we follow the history of the novel in different parts of India wecan see many regional peculiarities. But there were also recurring
patterns and common concerns. What inspired the authors to write

novels? Who read the novels? How did the culture of readingdevelop? How did the novels grapple with the problems of societalchange within a colonial society? What kind of a world did novels
open up for the readers?  Let us explore some of these questions
by focusing primarily on the writings of three authors from differentregions: Chandu Menon, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay
and Premchand.3.1 Uses of the NovelColonial administrators found ‚vernacular™ novels a valuable sourceof information on native life and customs. Such information was
useful for them in governing Indian society, with its large variety of
communities and castes. As outsiders, the British knew little about
life inside Indian households. The new novels in Indian languages
often had descriptions of domestic life. They showed how people
dressed, their forms of religious worship, their beliefs and practices,
and so on. Some of these books were translated into English, oftenby British administrators or Christian missionaries.
Indians used the novel as a powerful medium to criticise what theyconsidered defects in their society and to suggest remedies. Writers
like Viresalingam used the novel mainly to propagate their ideas
about society among a wider readership.
Novels also helped in establishing a relationship with the past. Manyof them told thrilling stories of adventures and intrigues set in the
past. Through glorified accounts of the past, these novels helped increating a sense of national pride among their readers.At the same time, people from all walks of life could read novels solong as they shared a common language. This helped in creating asense of collective belonging on the basis of one™s language.
 You would have noticed that people living in different regions speak
the same language in different ways Œ sometimes they use differentwords for the same thing; sometimes the same word is pronounceddifferently. With the coming of novels, such variations entered the

India and the Contemporary World192The most popular historical novelist in Tamil was
R. Krishnamurthy who wrote under the pen-
name ‚Kalki™. He was an active participant in the

freedom movement and the editor of the widely
read Tamil magazines 
Anandavikatan 
and Kalki
.Written in simple language and full of heroism,
adventure and suspense, Kalki™s novels captivated
the Tamil-reading public of an entire generation.
Box 7Fig. 19 Œ A page from theFig. 19 Œ A page from theFig. 19 Œ A page from theFig. 19 Œ A page from theFig. 19 Œ A page from thenovel novel novel novel novel Ponniyin SelvanPonniyin SelvanPonniyin SelvanPonniyin SelvanPonniyin Selvan, written, written, written, written, writtenby Kalki and serialised in theby Kalki and serialised in theby Kalki and serialised in theby Kalki and serialised in theby Kalki and serialised in themagazine magazine magazine magazine magazine KalkiKalkiKalkiKalkiKalki, 1951., 1951., 1951., 1951., 1951.world of print for the first time. The way characters spoke in anovel began to indicate their region, class or caste. Thus novels madetheir readers familiar with the ways in which people in other parts
of their land spoke their language.3.2 The Problem of Being ModernAlthough they were about imaginary stories, novels often spoke totheir readers about the real world. But novels did not always show
things exactly as they were in reality. Sometimes, they presented a
vision of how things ought to be. Social novelists often createdheroes and heroines with ideal qualities, who their readers could
admire and imitate. How were these ideal qualities defined? In manynovels written during the colonial period, the ideal person successfullydeals with one of the central dilemmas faced by colonial subjects:
how to be modern without rejecting tradition, how to accept ideascoming from the West without losing one™s identity.
Chandu Menon portrayed Indulekha as a woman of breathtakingbeauty, high intellectual abilities, artistic talent, and with an education
in English and Sanskrit. Madhavan, the hero of the novel, wasalso presented in ideal colours. He was a member of the newly

English-educated class of Nayars from the University of Madras.

193Novels, Society and HistoryFig. 20 Œ Cover page of Fig. 20 Œ Cover page of 
Fig. 20 Œ Cover page of Fig. 20 Œ Cover page of 
Fig. 20 Œ Cover page of 
KathanjaliKathanjaliKathanjaliKathanjaliKathanjali,,,,, a Kannadaa Kannadaa Kannadaa Kannadaa Kannadamagazine.magazine.magazine.magazine.magazine.Kathanjali started publication  in 1929 and
published short stories regularly. The pictureshows a mother reading out stories from a bookto her children.He was also a ‚first-rate Sanskrit scholar™. He dressed in Western
clothes. But, at the same time, he kept a long tuft of hair, according
to the Nayar custom.The heroes and heroines in most of the novels were people wholived in the modern world. Thus they were different from the idealor mythological characters of the earlier poetic literature of India.Under colonial rule, many of the English-educated class found
 newWestern ways of living and thinking attractive. But they also feared
that a wholesale adoption of Western values would destroy their
traditional ways of living. Characters like Indulekha and Madhavan

showed readers how Indian and foreign lifestyles could be broughttogether in an ideal combination.3.3 Pleasures of ReadingAs elsewhere in the world, in India too, the novel became a popular
medium of entertainment among the middle class. The

circulation of printed books allowed people to amuse themselvesin new ways. Picture books, translations from other languages,
popular songs sometimes composed on contemporary events, stories
in newspapers and magazines Œ all these offered new forms

of entertainment. Within this new culture of print, novels soonbecame immensely popular.
In Tamil, for example, there was a flood of popular novels in the
early decades of the twentieth century. Detective and mystery novels
often had to be printed again and again to meet the demand ofreaders: some of them were reprinted as many as twenty-two times!The novel also assisted in the spread of silent reading. We are so
used to reading in silence that it is difficult for us to think that thispractice was not very common in the past. As late as the nineteenth
century and perhaps even in the early twentieth century, written texts
were often read aloud for several people to hear. Sometimes novels
were also read in this way, but in general novels encouraged reading

alone and in silence. Individuals sitting at home or travelling in trainsenjoyed them. Even in a crowded room, the novel offered a specialworld of imagination into which the reader could slip, and be all

alone. In this, reading a novel was like daydreaming.

India and the Contemporary World1944  Women and the NovelMany people got worried about the effects of the novel on readerswho were taken away from their real surroundings into an imaginary
world where anything could happen. Some of them wrote innewspapers and magazines, advising people to stay away from theimmoral influence of novels. Women and children were often singled

out for such advice: they were seen as easily corruptible.Some parents kept novels in the lofts in their houses, out of theirchildren™s reach. Young people often read them in secret. This passion

was not limited only to the youth. Older women Œ some of whomcould not read Œ listened with fascinated attention to popularTamil novels read out to them by their grandchildren Œ a nice
reversal of the familiar grandma™s tales!But women did not remain mere readers of stories written by men;soon they also began to write novels. In some languages, the early

creations of women were poems, essays or autobiographicalpieces. In the early decades of the twentieth century, women insouth India also began writing novels and short stories. A reasonfor the popularity of novels among women was that it allowedfor a new conception of womanhood. Stories of love Œ which
was a staple theme of many novels Œ showed women who couldchoose or refuse their partners and relationships. It showedwomen who could to some extent control their lives. Some women

authors also wrote about women who changed the world of bothmen and women.Rokeya Hossein (1880-1932) was a reformer who, after she was
widowed, started a girl™s school in Calcutta. She wrote a 
satiricfantasy in English called Sultana™s Dream 
(1905) which shows a topsy-
turvy world in which women take the place of men. Her
novelPadmarag
 also showed the need for women to reform their condition
by their own actions.
New wordsSatire Œ A form of representation through writing, drawing,
painting, etc. that provides a criticism of society in a manner thatis witty and cleverFig. 21 Œ A woman reading,Fig. 21 Œ A woman reading,Fig. 21 Œ A woman reading,Fig. 21 Œ A woman reading,Fig. 21 Œ A woman reading,woodcut by Satyendranath Bishi.woodcut by Satyendranath Bishi.woodcut by Satyendranath Bishi.woodcut by Satyendranath Bishi.woodcut by Satyendranath Bishi.The woodcut shows how womenwere discovering the pleasure ofreading. By the end of thenineteenth century, images ofwomen reading became common inpopular magazines in India.Why women should not read novelsFrom a Tamil essay published in 1927:

‚Dear children, don™t read these novels, don™teven touch them. Your life will be ruined. You

will suffer disease and ailments. Why did the good
Lord make you Œ to wither away at a tender
age? To suffer in disease? To be despised by

your brothers, relatives and those around you?
No. No. You must become mothers; you must

lead happy lives; this is the divine purpose. You

who were born to fulfil this sublime goal, should
you ruin your life by going crazy after despicable
novels?™Essay by Thiru. Vi. Ka,  Translated by A.R.
Venkatachalapathy
SourceSource A
195Novels, Society and HistoryIt is not surprising that many men were suspicious of women writingnovels or reading them. This suspicion cut across communities.
Hannah Mullens, a Christian missionary and the author of Karuna oPhulmonir Bibaran (1852), reputedly the first novel in Bengali, tells herreaders that she wrote in secret. In the twentieth century, Sailabala
Ghosh Jaya, a popular novelist, could only write because her husbandprotected her. As we have seen in the case of the south, women and

girls were often discouraged from reading novels.
4.1 Caste Practices, ‚Lower-Castes™ and MinoritiesAs you have seen, 
Indulekha was a love story.
 But it was also about
an issue that was hotly debated at the time when the novel waswritten. This concerned the marriage practices of upper-caste Hindusin Kerala, especially the Nambuthiri Brahmins and the Nayars.

Nambuthiris were also major landlords in Kerala at that time; and a
large section of the Nayars were their tenants. In late-nineteenth-
century Kerala, a younger generation of English-educated Nayar
men who had acquired property and wealth on their own, beganarguing strongly against Nambuthiri alliances with Nayar women.They wanted new laws regarding marriage and property.
The story of 
Indulekha is interesting in the light of these debates. Suri
Nambuthiri, the foolish landlord who comes to marry Indulekha,
is the focus of much satire in the novel. The intelligent heroinerejects him and chooses Madhavan, the educated and handsomeNayar as her husband, and the young couple move to Madras,
where Madhavan joins the civil service. Suri Nambuthiri, desperate
to find a partner for himself, finally marries a poorer relation fromthe same family and goes away pretending that he has married
Indulekha! Chandu Menon clearly wanted his readers to appreciatethe new values of his hero and heroine and criticise the ignoranceand immorality of Suri Nambuthiri.Novels like Indirabai and 
Indulekha were written by members of the
upper castes, and were primarily about upper-caste characters. But
not all novels were of this kind.Potheri Kunjambu, a ‚lower-caste™ writer from north Kerala, wrote
a novel called Saraswativijayam in 1892, mounting a strong attack on
caste oppression. This novel shows a young man from an
‚untouchable™ caste, leaving his village to escape the cruelty of hisBrahmin landlord. He converts to Christianity, obtains modern
Women with books
‚These days we can see women in black bordered
sarees with massive books in their hands, walking
inside their houses. Often seeing them with these

books in hand, their brothers or husbands are
seized with fear Œ in case they are asked for
meanings.™
Sadharani, 1880.Box 8Fig. 22Fig. 22Fig. 22Fig. 22Fig. 22 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
 Œ 
Malabar Beauty, painting byMalabar Beauty, painting byMalabar Beauty, painting byMalabar Beauty, painting byMalabar Beauty, painting byRavi Varma.Ravi Varma.Ravi Varma.Ravi Varma.Ravi Varma.Chandu Menon thought that the novelwas similar to new trends in Indian
painting.One of the foremost oil painters of this
time was Raja Ravi Varma (1848-1906). Chandu Menon™s descriptionof his heroines may have been guidedby some of his paintings.
India and the Contemporary World196education, and returns as the judge in the local court. Meanwhile, thevillagers, thinking that the landlord™s men had killed him, file a case.
At the conclusion of the trial, the judge reveals his true identity, and

the Nambuthiri repents and reforms his ways. 
Saraswativijayam
 stresses
the importance of education for the upliftment of the lower castes.
From the 1920s, in Bengal too a new kind of novel emerged thatdepicted the lives of peasants and ‚low™ castes. Advaita Malla
Burman™s (1914-51) 
Titash Ekti Nadir Naam (1956) is an epic about
the Mallas, a community of fisherfolk who live off fishing in the
river Titash. The novel is about three generations of the Mallas,about their recurring tragedies and the story of Ananta, a child bornof parents who were tragically separated after their wedding night.
Ananta leaves the community to get educated in the city. The novel
describes the community life of the Mallas in great detail, their Holiand Kali Puja festivals, boat races, bhatiali songs, their relationships
of friendship and animosity with the peasants and the oppressionof the upper castes. Slowly the community breaks up and the Mallas
start fighting amongst themselves as new cultural influences from
the city start penetrating their lives. The life of the community and
that of the river is intimately tied. Their end comes together: as theriver dries up, the community dies too. While novelists before Burman

had featured ‚low™ castes as their protagonists, Titash is special becausethe author is himself from a ‚low-caste™, fisherfolk community.
Over time, the medium of the novel made room for the experiences
of communities that had not received much space in the literary
scene earlier. Vaikkom Muhammad Basheer (1908-94), for example,
was one of the early Muslim writers to gain wide renown as anovelist in Malayalam.Basheer had little formal education. Most of his works were based
on his own rich personal experience rather than on books from thepast. When he was in class five at school, Basheer left home to take
part in the Salt Satyagraha. Later he spent years wandering in differentparts of India and travelling even to Arabia, working in a ship, living
with Sufis and Hindu sanyasis, and training as a wrestler.
Basheer™s short novels and stories were written in the ordinary
language of conversation. With wonderful humour, Basheer™s novels
spoke about details from the everyday life of Muslim households.

He also brought into Malayalam writing themes which wereconsidered very unusual at that time Œ poverty, insanity and life
in prisons.
Fig. 23 Œ Basheer carrying books.Fig. 23 Œ Basheer carrying books.Fig. 23 Œ Basheer carrying books.Fig. 23 Œ Basheer carrying books.Fig. 23 Œ Basheer carrying books.In his early years as a writer,Basheer had great difficultyearning a living from his books.
He often sold them himself,
carrying copies personally tohouses and shops. In some of hisstories, Basheer wrote about hisdays as a vendor of his ownbooks.
197Novels, Society and History5  The Nation and its HistoryThe history written by colonial historians tended to depict Indians asweak, divided, and dependent on the British. These histories could
not satisfy the tastes of the new Indian administrators and intellectuals.

Nor did the traditional Puranic stories of the past Œ peopled by
gods and demons, filled with the fantastic and the supernatural Œ
seem convincing to those educated and working under the English

system. Such minds wanted a new view of the past that would
show that Indians could be independent minded and had been so in
history. The novel provided a solution. In it, the nation could be

imagined in a past that also featured historical characters, places,
events and dates.
In Bengal, many historical novels were about Marathas and Rajputs.
These novels produced a sense of a pan-Indian belonging. They

imagined the nation to be full of adventure, heroism, romance and
sacrifice Œ qualities that could not be found in the offices and streets
of the nineteenth-century world. The novel allowed the colonised
to give shape to their desires. Bhudeb Mukhopadhyay™s (1827-94)

Anguriya Binimoy (1857) was the first historical novel written in Bengal.Its hero Shivaji engages in many battles against a clever and treacherous
Aurangzeb. Man Singh persuades Shivaji  to make peace with

Aurangzeb. Realising that Aurangzeb intended to confine him as a

house prisoner, Shivaji escapes and returns to battle. What gives him
courage and tenacity is his belief that he is a nationalist fighting for
the freedom of Hindus.
The imagined nation of the novel was so powerful that itcould inspire actual political movements. Bankim™s 
Anandamath (1882)
is a novel about a secret Hindu militia that fights Muslims to establish
a Hindu kingdom. It was a novel that inspired many kinds of
freedom fighters.
Many of these novels also reveal the problems of thinking aboutthe nation. Was India to be a nation of only a single religious

community? Who had natural claims to belong to the nation?5.1 The Novel and Nation MakingImagining a heroic past was one way in which the novel helped inpopularising the sense of belonging to a common nation. AnotherFig. 24 Œ Image from the film Fig. 24 Œ Image from the film Fig. 24 Œ Image from the film Fig. 24 Œ Image from the film Fig. 24 Œ Image from the film ChemmeenChemmeenChemmeenChemmeenChemmeen.....Many novels were made into films. The novelChemmeen (Shrimp, 1956), written by ThakazhiSivasankara Pillai (1912-99), is set in the
fishing community in Kerala, and charactersspeak a variety of Malayalam used by fisherfolkin the region. The film Chemmeen, directed byRamu Kariat, was made in 1965.Fig. 25 Fig. 25 Fig. 25 Fig. 25 Fig. 25 ŒŒŒŒŒ A still from the
 A still from the
 A still from the
 A still from the
 A still from the
Kannada film Kannada film Kannada film Kannada film Kannada film Chomana DudiChomana DudiChomana DudiChomana DudiChomana Dudi(Choma™s Drum, directed by(Choma™s Drum, directed by(Choma™s Drum, directed by(Choma™s Drum, directed by(Choma™s Drum, directed byB.V. Karanth in 1975).B.V. Karanth in 1975).B.V. Karanth in 1975).B.V. Karanth in 1975).B.V. Karanth in 1975).The film is based on a novel ofthe same title written in 1930 bythe celebrated Kannada novelistSivarama Karanth (1902-1997).
India and the Contemporary World198way was to include various classes in the novel so that they could beseen to belong to a shared world. Premchand™s novels, for instance,
are filled with all kinds of powerful characters drawn from all levelsof society. In his novels you meet aristocrats and landlords, middle-

level peasants and landless labourers, middle-class professionals andpeople from the margins of society. The women characters are
strong individuals, especially those who come from the lower classes
and are not modernised. Unlike many of his contemporaries,Premchand rejected the nostalgic obsession with ancient history.
Instead, his novels look towards the future without forgetting the
importance of the past.Drawn from various strata of society, Premchand™s characters create
a community based on democratic values. The central character of

his novel 
Rangbhoomi
 (The Arena), Surdas, is a visually impaired beggar
from a so-called ‚untouchable™ caste. The very act of choosing sucha person as the ‚hero™ of a novel is significant. It makes the lives of
the most oppressed section of society as worthy of literary reflection.We see Surdas struggling against the forcible takeover of his land
for establishing a tobacco factory. As we read the  story we wonder
about industrialisation and its impact on society and people. Whodoes it serve? Must other ways of living be sacrificed for it? The

story of Surdas was inspired by Gandhi™s personality and ideas.
Godan (The Gift of Cow), published in 1936, remains Premchand™s
best-known work. It is an epic of the Indian peasantry.  The novel

tells the moving story of Hori and his wife Dhania, a peasant couple.Landlords, moneylenders, priests and colonial bureaucrats Œ all thosewho hold power in society Œ form a network of oppression, rob

their land and make them into landless labourers. Yet Hori and Dhania
retain their dignity to the end.Read Godan. Write briefly on:How Premchand depicts the life of peasants in the novel.What the novel tells us about the life of peasants during theGreat Depression.ActivityFig. 26 Œ Portrait ofFig. 26 Œ Portrait ofFig. 26 Œ Portrait ofFig. 26 Œ Portrait ofFig. 26 Œ Portrait ofPremchand (1880-Premchand (1880-Premchand (1880-Premchand (1880-Premchand (1880-1936).1936).1936).1936).1936).Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941) developed the
Bengali novel after Bankim™s death. His early novels
were historical; he later shifted to writing stories
about domestic relationships. He was mainly
preoccupied with the condition of women and
nationalism. Both concerns are featured in hisGhare Baire (1916) translated in 1919 as 
TheHome and the World. The story is about Bimala,the wife of Nikhilesh, a liberal landlord who
believes that he can save his country by patiently
bettering the lives of its poor and marginal
sections. But Bimala is attracted to Sandip, her
husband™s friend and a firebrand extremist. Sandip
is so completely dedicated to throwing out the
British that he does not mind if the poor ‚low™
castes suffer and Muslims are made to feel like
outsiders. By becoming a part of Sandip™s group,
Bimala gets a sense of self-worth and self-esteem.
Rabindranth also shows the contradictory effects
of nationalist involvement for women. Bimala may
be admired by the young males of the group
but she cannot influence their decisions. Indeed
she is used by Sandip to acquire funds for the
movement. Tagore™s novels are striking because

they make us rethink both man-woman
relationships and nationalism. Box 9
199Novels, Society and HistoryConclusionWe have seen how, over the course of its history in both the West
and in India, the novel became part of the lives of different sectionsof people. Developments in print technologies allowed the novelto break out of its small circle of readers and introduced fresh
ways of reading. But through their stories, novels have also shown a
capacity to include and focus on the lives of those who were notoften known to literate and middle-class circles. We have seen some

examples of these in Premchand, but they are equally present in theworks of other novelists.
Bringing together people from varied backgrounds produces a senseof shared community. The most notable form of this community
is the nation. Equally significant is the fact that by bringing in boththe powerful and the marginal peoples and cultures, the novel throws
up many questions about the nature of these communities. We can
say then that novels produce a sense of sharing, and promote anunderstanding of different people, different values and different
communities. At the same time they explore how different groups
begin to question or reflect upon their own identities.

Write in briefProject1.Explain the following:
a)Social changes in Britain which led to an increase in women readers

b)What actions of Robinson Crusoe make us see him as a typical coloniser.

c)After 1740, the readership of novels began to include poorer people.

d)Novelists in colonial India wrote for a political cause.
2.Outline the changes in technology and society which led to an increase  in
readers of the novel in eighteenth-century Europe.3.Write a note on:
a)The Oriya novel

b)Jane Austen™s portrayal of women

c)The picture of the new middle class which the novel 
Pariksha-Guru portrays.
Imagine that you are a historian in 3035 AD. You have just located two novels which were written
in the twentieth century. What do they tell you about society and customs of the time?
Write in briefDiscuss1.Discuss some of the social changes in nineteenth-century Britain which Thomas Hardy
and Charles Dickens wrote about.2.Summarise the concern in both nineteenth-century Europe and India about women
reading  novels. What does this suggest about how women were viewed?3.In what ways was the novel in colonial India useful for both the colonisers as well as the
nationalists?4.Describe how the issue of caste was included in novels in India. By referring to any two
novels, discuss the ways in which they tried to make readers think about existing social
issues.5.Describe the ways in which the novel in India attempted to create a sense of pan-Indian
belonging.DiscussProjectIndia and the Contemporary World200
