53Nationalism  in  India
As you have seen, modern nationalism in Europe came to beassociated with the formation of nation-states. It also meant a change
in people™s understanding of who they were, and what defined their
identity and sense of belonging. New symbols and icons, new songs

and ideas forged new links and redefined the boundaries ofcommunities. In most countries the making of this new national
identity was a long process. How did this consciousness emerge

in India?In India, as in Vietnam and many other colonies, the growth ofmodern nationalism is intimately connected to the anti-colonial
movement. People began discovering their unity in the process oftheir struggle with colonialism. The sense of being oppressed under
colonialism provided a shared bond that tied many different groups
together. But each class and group felt the effects of colonialism
differently, their experiences were varied, and their notions of
freedom were not always the same.  The Congress under Mahatma

Gandhi tried to forge these groups together within one movement.But the unity did not emerge without conflict.In an earlier textbook you have read about the growth of nationalismin India up to the first decade of the twentieth century. In this chapter
we will pick up the story from the 1920s and study the Non-Cooperation and Civil Disobedience Movements. We will explore

how the Congress sought to develop the national movement, howdifferent social groups participated in the movement, and hownationalism captured the imagination of people.Nationalism  in  India
Chapter IIINationalism in IndiaFig. 1 Œ 6 April 1919.
Mass processions on
the streets became a

common feature during
the national movement.
India and the Contemporary World541  The First World War, Khilafat and Non-Cooperation
In the years after 1919, we see the national movement spreading tonew areas, incorporating new social groups, and developing newmodes of struggle. How do we understand these developments?
What implications did they have?First of all, the war created a new economic and political situation.It led to a huge increase in defence expenditure which was financedby war loans and increasing taxes: customs duties were raised and
income tax introduced. Through the war years prices increased Œdoubling between 1913 and 1918 Œ  leading to extreme hardship
for the common people. Villages were called upon to supply soldiers,
and the forced recruitment 
in rural areas caused widespread anger.
Then in 1918-19 and 1920-21, crops failed in many parts of India,resulting in acute shortages of food. This was accompanied by an
influenza epidemic. According to the census of 1921, 12 to 13 millionpeople perished as a result of famines and  the epidemic.
People hoped that their hardships would end after the war wasover. But that did not happen.
At this stage a new leader appeared and suggested a new mode
of struggle.
1.1 The Idea of SatyagrahaMahatma Gandhi returned to India in January 1915. As you know,

he had come from South Africa where he had successfully foughtNew wordsForced recruitment Œ A process by which the
colonial state forced people to join the army
Fig. 2 Œ Indian workers in South
Africa march through Volksrust, 6
November 1913.

Mahatma Gandhi was leading the
workers from Newcastle to
Transvaal. When the marchers were
stopped and Gandhiji arrested,
thousands of more workers joined
the satyagraha against racist laws
that denied rights  to non-whites.

55Nationalism  in  India
the racist regime with a novel method of mass agitation, which hecalled satyagraha. The idea of satyagraha emphasised the power oftruth and the need to search for truth. It suggested that if the cause

was true, if the struggle was against injustice, then physical force was

not necessary to fight the oppressor. Without seeking vengeance or
being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through non-
violence. This could be done by  appealing to the conscience of the

oppressor. People Œ including the oppressors Œ had to be persuaded

to see the truth, instead of being forced to accept truth through theuse of violence. By this struggle, truth was bound to ultimately
triumph. Mahatma Gandhi believed that this dharma of non-violence
could unite all Indians.
After arriving in India, Mahatma Gandhi successfully organisedsatyagraha movements in various places. In 1916 he travelled to
Champaran in  Bihar to inspire the peasants to struggle against the

oppressive plantation system. Then in 1917,  he organised a
 satyagrahato support the peasants of the Kheda district of Gujarat. Affectedby crop failure and a plague epidemic, the peasants of Kheda couldnot pay the revenue, and were demanding that revenue collection be
relaxed. In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi went to Ahmedabad to organise
a satyagraha movement amongst cotton mill workers.
1.2 The Rowlatt ActEmboldened with this success, Gandhiji in 1919 decided to launch a
nationwide satyagraha against the proposed Rowlatt Act (1919). This
Act had been hurriedly passed through the Imperial LegislativeCouncil despite the united opposition of the Indian members. It
gave the government enormous powers to repress political activities,

and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two
years. Mahatma Gandhi wanted non-violent civil disobedience against
such unjust laws, which would start with a hartal on 6 April.
Rallies were organised in various cities, workers went on strike inrailway workshops, and shops closed down. Alarmed by the popular

upsurge, and scared that lines of communication such as the railwaysand telegraph would be disrupted, the British administration decidedto clamp down on nationalists. Local leaders were picked up from

Amritsar, and Mahatma Gandhi was barred from entering Delhi.
On 10 April, the police in Amritsar fired upon a peaceful procession,provoking widespread attacks on banks, post offices and railwaystations. Martial law was imposed and General Dyer took command.
Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha‚It is said of ﬁpassive resistanceﬂ that it is theweapon of the weak, but the power which is
the subject of this article can be used only
by the strong. This power is not passive
resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The

movement in South Africa was not passive

but active  –
‚ Satyagraha is not physical force. A 
satyagrahidoes not inflict pain on the adversary; he does
not seek his destruction – In the use ofsatyagraha
, there is no ill-will whatever.
‚ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very
substance of the soul. That is why this force is

called satyagraha. The soul is informed with

knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. – Non-
violence is the supreme dharma –‚It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or
Europe in force of arms. The British worship the

war-god and they can all of them become, as
they are becoming, bearers of arms. The
hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms.
They have made the religion of non-violence their
own ...™
SourceSource ARead the text carefully. What did Mahatma
Gandhi mean when he said satyagraha is
active resistance?Activity
