NOTES FOR THE TEACHERCHAPTER 3 : MONEY AND CREDITMoney is a fascinating subject and full ofcuriosities. It is important to capture this
element for the students. The history of
money and how various forms were used at
different times is an interesting story. At this
stage the purpose is to allow students to
realise the social situation in which these
forms were used.  Modern forms of money
are linked to the banking system. This is the
central idea of the first part of the chapter.The present situation in India, wherenewer forms of money are slowly spreading
with computerisation of the banking system,
offers many opportunities to students to
explore on their own. We need not get into aformal discussion of the ‚functions of money™
but let it come up as questions. There are
certain areas that are not covered such as
‚creation of money™ (money multiplier) or the
backing of the modern system that may be
discussed if you desire.Credit is a crucial element in economiclife and it is therefore important to first
understand this in a conceptual manner.What are the aspects that one looks at in
any credit arrangement and how this affects
people is the main focus of the second part
of the chapter. The world around us offersa tremendous variety of such arrangements
and it would be ideal to explain these
aspects of credit from situations that arefamiliar to your students. The other crucial
issue of credit is its availability to all,
especially the poor, and on reasonableterms. We need to emphasise that this is aright of the people and without which a large
section of them would be kept out of the
development process. There are many
innovative interventions, such as that of
Grameen Bank, that students may be made
familiar with but it is important to realise
that we don™t have answers to all questions.
We need to find new ways and this is one ofthe social challenges that developing
countries face.Sources for InformationThe data on formal and informal sector creditused in this chapter is drawn from the
survey on rural debt by the National Sample
Survey Organisation (All India Debt andInvestment Survey, 70th Round 2013,conducted by NSSO. The information anddata on Grameen Bank is taken from
newspaper reports and websites. In order
to get the details of bank-related statistics
or a particular detail of a bank, you can log
on to the websites of Reserve Bank of
India (www.rbi.org) and the concernedbanks. Data on self-help groups is provided
on the website of National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) (www.nabard.org).3838
3838
38UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT3939
3939
39The use of money spans a very largepart of our everyday life. Look around
you and you would easily be able to
identify several transactions involving
money in any single day. Can you
make a list of these? In many of these
transactions, goods are being bought
and sold with the use of money. In
some of these transactions, services
are being exchanged with money.  For
some, there might not be any actual
transfer of money taking place now
but a promise to pay money later.Have you ever wondered whytransactions are made in
money? The reason is simple.
A person holding money can easily
exchange it for any commodity or
service that he or she might want.
Thus everyone  prefers to receive
payments in money and then
exchange the money for things that
they want.  Take the case of a shoe
manufacturer. He wants to sell shoesin the market and buy wheat.  The
shoe manufacturer will first exchange
shoes that he has produced for
money, and then exchange the money
for wheat. Imagine how much moredifficult it would be if the shoe
manufacturer had to directly
exchange shoes for wheat without the
use of money. He would have to look
for a wheat growing farmer who notonly wants to sell wheat
but also wants to buy the
shoes in exchange.
That is, both parties
have to agree tosell and buy eachothers commodities.This is known asdouble coincidenceof wants. What a persondesires to sell is exactly what theother wishes to buy. In a bartersystem where goods are directly
exchanged without the use of money,
double coincidence of wants is an
essential feature.In contrast, in an economy wheremoney is in use, money by providing
the crucial intermediate step
eliminates the need for double
coincidence of wants. It is no longer
necessary for the shoe manufacturer
to look for a farmer who will buy his
shoes and at the same time sell himMONEYMONEY
MONEYMONEY
MONEYANDAND
ANDAND
ANDCREDITCREDIT
CREDITCREDIT
CREDITCHAPTER 3MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGEI™LL GIVEYOU SHOESFOR YOURWHEAT.
I DON™T NEEDSHOES. I NEEDCLOTHES.I WANT SHOES.BUT I DON™T HAVEWHEAT.

4040
4040
40UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENTWe have seen that money issomething that can act as a mediumof exchange in transactions.  Before
the introduction of coins, a variety of
objects was used as money. For
example, since the very early ages,
Indians used  grains and cattle as
money. Thereafter came the use of
metallic coins Š gold, silver, coppercoins Š a phase which continued well
into the last century.CurrencyModern forms of money includecurrency Š paper notes and coins.
Unlike the things that were used as
money earlier, modern currency is notmade of precious metal such as gold,
silver and copper.  And unlike grainand cattle, they are neither of
everyday use. The modern currency
is without any use of its own.Then, why is it accepted as amedium of exchange?  It is accepted
as a medium of exchange because the
currency is authorised by the
government of the country.In India, the Reserve Bank of Indiaissues currency notes on behalf of the
central government. As per Indian
law, no other individual ororganisation is allowed to issue
currency. Moreover, the law legalisesthe use of rupee as a medium of
payment that cannot be refused in
settling transactions in India. No
individual in India can legally refuse
a payment made in rupees. Hence,
the rupee is widely accepted as a
medium of exchange.Deposits with BanksThe other form in which people holdmoney is as deposits with banks. At
a point of time, people need only some
currency  for their day-to-day needs.
For instance, workers who receive
their salaries at the end of each month
have extra cash at the beginning of
the month. What do people do with
this extra cash? They deposit it with
the banks by opening a bank
account in their name. Banks accept
the deposits and also pay an amountas interest on the deposits. In this waypeople™s money is safe with the
banks and it earns an amount asinterest.  People also have the
provision to withdraw the money as
and when they require. Since the
deposits in the bank accounts can be
withdrawn on demand, these
deposits are called demand deposits.1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things?2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages beingpaid through barter?LET™S WORK THESE OUTMODERN FORMS OF  MONEYEarly punch-marked coins(may be 2500years old)GuptacoinsGoldMoharfromAkbar™sreignwheat. All he has to do is find a buyerfor his shoes. Once he has exchanged
his shoes for money, he can purchase
wheat or any other commodity in the
market. Since money acts as an
intermediate in the exchange process,
it is called a medium of exchange.TughlaqcoinModern coin
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT4141
4141
41Cheque PaymentsCheque PaymentsCheque PaymentsCheque PaymentsCheque PaymentsA shoe manufacturer, M. Salim has to make a payment to the leather supplier and writesa cheque for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs hisbank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque,and  deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank
account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without
any payment of cash.Thus we see that demand depositsshare the essential features of money.The facility of cheques against demand
deposits makes it possible to directly
settle payments without the use of cash.
Since demand deposits are accepted
widely as a means of payment, along
with currency, they constitute moneyin the modern economy.You must remember the role thatthe banks play here. But for the
banks, there would be no demand
deposits and no payments by
cheques against these deposits.  The
modern forms of money Š currency
and deposits Š are closely linked to
the working of the modern banking
system.Account numberCoding used by banksCheque numberDemand deposits offer anotherinteresting facility. It is this facility
which lends it the essential
characteristics of money (that of a
medium of exchange). You wouldhave heard of payments beingmade by cheques instead of cash.
For payment through cheque, the
payer who has an account with the
bank, makes out a cheque for a
specific amount. A cheque is a
paper instructing the bank to pay
a specific amount from the
person™s account to the person in
whose name the cheque has been
issued.Bank branchcodeLET US TRY AND UNDERSTANDHOW CHEQUE PAYMENTS AREMADE AND REALISED WITHAN EXAMPLE.
4242
4242
42UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENTLet us take the story of banks further.What do the banks do with thedeposits which they accept from the
public? There is an interesting
mechanism at work here. Banks keep
only a small proportion of their
deposits as cash with themselves.  For
example, banks in India these days
hold about 15 per cent of their
deposits as cash. This is kept as
provision to pay the depositors who
might come to withdraw money from
the bank on any given day. Since, on
any particular day, only some of its
many depositors come to withdraw
cash, the bank is able to manage with
this cash.Banks use the major portion of thedeposits to extend loans.  There is ahuge demand for loans for various
economic activities. We shall read moreabout this in the following sections.
Banks make use of the deposits to
meet the loan requirements of the
people.  In this way, banks mediate
between those who have surplus
funds (the depositors) and those who
are in need of these funds (the
borrowers). Banks charge a higher
interest rate on loans than what they
offer on deposits. The difference
between what is charged from
borrowers and what is paid to
depositors is their main source of
income.LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKSPeople makedepositsPeople makewithdrawals andget interestPeople takeloansPeople repayloans withinterestDEPOSITORSBORROWERS1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would hewrite a cheque to withdraw money?2. Tick the correct answer.After the transaction between Salim and Prem,(i)Salim™s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem™s balance increases.(ii)Salim™s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem™s balance increases.(iii)Salim™s balance in his bank account increases and Prem™s balance decreases.3. Why are demand deposits considered as money?LET™S WORK THESE OUTWhat do you think would happenif all the depositors went to askfor their money at the same time?
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT4343
4343
43A large number of transactions in our day-to-day activitiesinvolve credit in some form or the other. Credit (loan) refers toan agreement in which the lender supplies the borrower withmoney, goods or services in return for the promise of futurepayment. Let us see how credit works through the followingtwo examples.(1) Festival Season(1) Festival Season(1) Festival Season(1) Festival Season(1) Festival SeasonIt is festival season two months from nowand the shoe manufacturer, Salim, hasreceived an order from a large trader in
town for 3,000 pairs of shoes to be
delivered in a month time. To complete
production on time, Salim has to hire a few
more workers for stitching and pasting
work. He has to purchase the raw
materials. To meet these expenses, Salim
obtains loans from two sources. First, he
asks the leather supplier to supply leathernow and promises to pay him later.Second, he obtains loan in cash from the
large trader as advance payment for
1000 pairs of shoes with a promise to
deliver the whole order by the end of the
month.At the end of the month, Salim is able todeliver the order, make a good profit, andrepay the money that he had borrowed.(2) Swapna™s Problem(2) Swapna™s Problem(2) Swapna™s Problem(2) Swapna™s Problem(2) Swapna™s ProblemTWO DIFFERENT CREDIT SITUATIONSIn this case, Salim obtains credit to meet the workingcapital needs of production. The credit helps him to meet the
ongoing expenses of production, complete production on time,
and thereby increase his earnings. Credit therefore plays avital and positive role in this situation.Swapna, a small farmer, grows groundnut on her threeacres of land. She takes a loan from the moneylender
to meet the expenses of cultivation, hoping that her
harvest would help repay the loan. Midway through
the season the crop is hit by pests and the crop
fails. Though Swapna sprays  her crops with
expensive pesticides, it makes little difference. She
is unable to repay the moneylender and the debt
grows over the year into a large amount. Next
year, Swapna takes a fresh loan for cultivation.It is a normal crop this year. But the earningsare not enough to cover the old loan.
She is caught in debt. She has to sell
a part of the land to pay off the debt.
TERMS OF CREDITEvery loan agreement specifies aninterest rate which the borrower must
pay to the lender along with theIn rural areas, the main demandfor credit is for crop production. Crop
production involves considerable
costs on seeds, fertilisers, pesticides,
water, electricity, repair of equipment,etc. There is a minimum stretch of
three to four months between the time
when the farmers buy these inputsand when they sell the crop. Farmersusually take crop loans at the
beginning of the season and repay the
loan after harvest. Repayment of the
loan is crucially dependent on the
income from farming.1.Fill the following table.2.Supposing Salim continues to get orders from traders. What would behis position after 6 years?3.What are the reasons that make Swapna™s situation so risky? Discuss
factors Œ pesticides; role of moneylenders; climate.LET™S WORK THESE OUTSalimSwapnaWhy did they need credit?What was the risk?
What was the outcome?In Swapna™s case, the failure of thecrop made loan repaymentimpossible. She had to sell part of the
land to repay the loan. Credit, instead
of helping Swapna improve her
earnings, left her worse off. This is an
example of what is commonly calleddebt-trap. Credit in this case pushesthe borrower into a situation fromwhich recovery is very painful.In one situation credit helps toincrease earnings and therefore the
person is better off than before. Inanother situation, because of thecrop failure, creditpushes the person into
a debt trap. To repay
her loan she has to sell
a portion of her land.
She is clearly much
worse off than before.
Whether credit would
be useful or not,therefore, dependson the risks in the
situation and whetherthere is some support,in case of loss.repayment of the principal. In
addition, lenders may demand
collateral (security) against loans.Collateral is an asset that theborrower owns (such as land,
building, vehicle, livestocks,
deposits with banks) and  uses this
as a guarantee to a lender until
the loan is repaid. If the borrowerfails to repay the loan, the lender has
the right to sell the asset or collateral
to obtain payment. Property such as
land titles, deposits with banks,
livestock are some common examples
of collateral used for borrowing.
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT4545
4545
45A House LoanA House LoanA House LoanA House LoanA House LoanMegha has taken a loan of Rs 5 lakhs from thebank  to purchase a house. The annual interest
rate on the loan is 12 per cent and the loan is to
be repaid in 10 years in monthly instalments.
Megha had to submit to the bank, documents
showing her employment records and salary
before the bank agreed to give her the loan. The
bank retained as collateral the papers of the new
house, which will be returned to Megha onlywhen she repays the entire loan with interest.Fill the following details of Megha™s housing loan.Interest rate, collateral anddocumentation requirement, and themode of repayment together comprisewhat is called the terms of credit. Theterms of credit vary substantially fromone credit arrangement to another.They may vary depending on the
nature of the lender and the borrower.The next section will provide examples
of the varying terms of credit in
different credit arrangements.1.Why do lenders ask for collateral while lending?2.Given that a large number of people in our country are poor, does it in any wayaffect their capacity to borrow?3.Fill in the blanks choosing the correct option from the brackets.While taking a loan, borrowers look for easy terms of credit. Thismeans __________ (low/high) interest rate, ______________(easy/
tough) conditions for repayment, ___________(less/more) collateral
and documentation requirements.LET™S WORK THESE OUTLoan amount (in Rupees)Duration of loan
Documents required
Interest rate
Mode of repayment
Collateral
SS
SS
Shyamal tells us that every season he needsloans for cultivation on his 1.5 acres of land. Tilla few years back, he would borrow money from
the village moneylender at an interest rate of
five per cent per month (60% per annum).
For the last few years, Shyamal has beenborrowing from an agricultural trader in the
village at an interest rate of three per centper month. At the beginning of the cropping
season, the trader supplies the farm inputs on
credit, which is  to be repaid when the crops
are ready for harvest.Besides the interest charge on the loan, thetrader also makes the farmers promise tosell the crop to him. This way the trader
can ensure that the money is repaid
promptly. Also, since the crop prices are lowafter the harvest, the trader is able to
make a profit from buying the crop at a low
price from the farmers and then selling it
later when the price has risen.Variety of Credit ArrangementsVariety of Credit ArrangementsVariety of Credit ArrangementsVariety of Credit ArrangementsVariety of Credit ArrangementsExample of a VillageRohit and Ranjan had finished reading about the terms of credit in class.They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed intheir area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the
borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to somepeople in their village.  Read what they record...15th Nov, 2006.We head directly for the fields where most farmers andlabourers would be working at this time of the day. The fieldsare planted with potato crops. We first meet Shyamal, a smallfarmer in Sonpur, a small irrigated village.WW
WW
We next meet Arun who is supervising thework of one farm labourer. Arun has sevenacres of land. He is one of the few personsin Sonpur to receive bank loan for
cultivation. The interest rate on the  loan
is 8.5 per cent per annum, and can be repaid
anytime in the next three years.  Arun plansto repay the loan after harvest by selling a
part of the crop. He then intends to storethe rest of the potatoes in a cold storage
and  apply for a fresh loan from the bank
against the cold storage receipt. The bank
offers this facility to farmers who have
taken crop loan from them.RRRRRama is working in a neighbouring field. Sheworks as an agricultural labourer. There areseveral months in the year when Rama hasno work, and needs credit to meet the dailyexpenses. Expenses on sudden illnesses orfunctions in the family are also met throughloans. Rama has to depend on her employer,a medium landowner in Sonpur, for credit.The landowner charges an interest rate of5 per cent per month. Rama repays themoney by working for the landowner. Mostof the time, Rama has to take a fresh loan,before the previous loan has been repaid.At present, she owes the landownerRs 5,000. Though the landowner doesn™ttreat her well, she continues to work for himsince she can get loans from him when inneed. Rama tells us that the only source ofcredit for the landless people in Sonpur arethe landowner-employers.
Loans from CooperativesLoans from CooperativesLoans from CooperativesLoans from CooperativesLoans from CooperativesBesides banks, the other major source of cheap creditin rural areas are the cooperative societies (or
cooperatives).  Members of a cooperative pool their
resources for cooperation in certain areas. There are
several types of cooperatives possible such as
farmers cooperatives, weavers cooperatives,industrial workers cooperatives, etc. Krishak
Cooperative functions in a village not very far away
from Sonpur. It has 2300 farmers as members. Itaccepts deposits from its members. With these
deposits as collateral, the Cooperative has obtained
a large loan from the bank. These funds are used to
provide loans to members. Once these loans are
repaid, another round of lending can take place.Krishak Cooperative provides loans for the purchaseof agricultural implements, loans for cultivation
and agricultural trade, fishery loans, loans for
construction of houses and for a variety of other
expenses.1.List the various sources of credit in Sonpur.2.Underline the various uses of credit in Sonpur in the above passages.3.Compare the terms of credit for the small farmer, the medium farmer and the landlessagricultural worker in Sonpur.4.Why will Arun have a higher income from cultivation compared to Shyamal?5.Can everyone in Sonpur get credit at a cheap rate? Who are the people who can?6.Tick the correct answer.(i) Over the years, Rama™s debt·will rise.·will remain constant.·will decline.(ii) Arun is one of the few people in Sonpur to take a bank loan because·other people in the village prefer to borrow from the moneylenders.·banks demand collateral which everyone cannot provide.·interest rate on bank loans is same as the interest rate charged bythe traders.7.Talk to some people to find out the credit arrangements that exist in your area. Recordyour conversation. Note the differences in the terms of credit across people.LET™S WORK THESE OUTMM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT4747
4747
47
the RBI sees that the banks give loansnot just to profit-making businesses
and traders but also to small
cultivators, small scale industries, to
small borrowers etc. Periodically,banks have to submit information tothe RBI on how much they are
lending, to whom, at what interest
rate, etc.There is no organisation whichsupervises the credit activities of
lenders in the informal sector. Theycan lend at whatever interest rate theyWe have seen in theabove examples that
people obtain loans from
various sources. The
various types of loans
can be conveniently
grouped as formalsector loans andinformal sector loans.Among the former
are loans from banks
and cooperatives. The
informal lenders include
moneylenders, traders,
employers, relatives and
friends, etc.  In Graph 1
you can see the various
sources of credit to rural
households in India. Is more credit
coming from the formal sector or the
informal sector?The Reserve Bank of Indiasupervises the functioning of formal
sources of loans.  For instance, we
have seen that the banks maintain a
minimum cash balance out of the
deposits they receive. The RBI
monitors the banks in actually
maintaining cash balance. Similarly,FORMAL SECTOR CREDIT IN INDIAGraph 1 : Sources of Credit per Rs 1000of Rural Households in India in 2012BUT WHY SHOULDA BANK WANT USUS
USUS
US  

  
 TO
HAVE A HIGHER INCOME?Other nonInstitutionalAgencies 2%Government 1%CooperativeSociety/Bank 25%Relatives andFriends 8%Land Lord 1%Other InstitutionalAgencies 5%CommercialBank 25%Money Lender33%
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT4949
4949
49choose. There is no one to stop themfrom using unfair means to get their
money back.Compared to the formal lenders,most of the informal lenders charge a
much higher interest on loans. Thus,
the cost to the borrower of informal
loans is much higher.Higher cost of borrowing means alarger part of the earnings of the
borrowers is used to repay the loan.
Hence, borrowers have less income
left for themselves (as we saw for
Shyamal in Sonpur). In certain
cases, the high interest rate forborrowing can mean that the amount
to be repaid is greater than the
income of the borrower. This couldlead to increasing debt (as we saw for
Rama in Sonpur) and debt trap. Also,
people who might wish to start an
enterprise by borrowing may not do
so because of the high cost of
borrowing.For these reasons, banks andcooperative societies need to lend
more. This would lead
to higher incomes
and many peoplecould then borrow
cheaply for a variety
of needs. Theycould grow crops, do
business, set up
small-scale industries
etc. They could set up
new industries ortrade in goods. Cheapand affordable creditis crucial for the
country™s develop-
ment.Formal and Informal Credit:Who gets what?Graph 2 shows the importance offormal and informal sources of creditfor people in urban areas.  The peopleare divided into four groups, frompoor to rich, as shown in the figure.
You can see that 85 per cent of theloans taken by poor households in the
urban areas are from informal
sources. Compare this with the rich
urban households. What do you
find? Only 10 per cent of their loans
are from informal sources, while 90
per cent are from formal sources. A
similar pattern is also found in rural
areas. The rich households are
availing cheap credit from formal
lenders whereas the poor households
have to pay a large amount for
borrowing.What does all this suggest? First,the formal sector still meets only about
half of the total credit needs of therural people. The remaining creditneeds are met from informal sources.Graph 2 : Of all the loans taken by urban housholds, whatpercentage was formal and what percentage was informal?poorhouseholdswell-offrichhousholdswith few assetshouseholdshouseholds
BLUE : Per cent of loans from the INFORMAL sector85%15%PURPLE : Per cent of loans from the FORMAL sector10%90%72%28%53%47%
5050
5050
50UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENTMost loans from informal lenderscarry a very high interest rate and do
little to increase the income of the
borrowers. Thus, it is necessarythat banks and cooperatives
increase their lending particularly
in the rural areas, so that the
dependence on informal sources
of credit reduces.1.What are the differences between formal and informal sources of credit?2.Why should credit at reasonable rates be available for all?3.Should there be a supervisor, such as the Reserve Bank of India, that looks into theloan activities of informal lenders? Why would its task be quite difficult?4.Why do you think that the share of formal sector credit is higher for the richer householdscompared to the poorer households?LET™S WORK THESE OUTSELF-HELP GROUPS FOR THE POORSecondly, while formal sectorloans need to expand, it is alsonecessary that everyone receives
these loans. At present, it is the richerhouseholds who receive formal credit
whereas the poor have to depend on
the informal sources. It is important
that the formal credit is distributed
more equally so that the poor can
benefit from the cheaper loans.In the previous section we have seen
that poor households are still
dependent on informal sources of
credit. Why is it so? Banks are not
present everywhere in rural India.
Even when they are present, getting a
loan from a bank is much more
difficult than taking a loan from
informal sources. As we saw for
Megha, bank loans require properdocuments and collateral. Absence of
collateral is one of the major reasons
which prevents the poor from getting
bank loans. Informal lenders such as
moneylenders, on the other hand,
know the borrowers personally and
hence are often willing to give a
loan without collateral. The borrowers
can, if necessary, approach the
moneylenders even without repayingA workerstitching a quiltDO YOU THINK A BANKWILL GIVE ME ALOAN?
MM
MM
MONEYONEY
ONEYONEY
ONEY  
  
 ANDAND
ANDAND
AND C C
 C C
 CREDITREDIT
REDITREDIT
REDIT5151
5151
51their earlier loans. However, themoneylenders charge very high ratesof interest, keep no records of the
transactions and harass the poor
borrowers.In recent years, people have triedout some newer ways of providing
loans to the poor. The idea is toorganise rural poor, in particularwomen, into small Self Help Groups
(SHGs) and pool (collect) their
savings. A typical SHG has 15-20
members, usually belonging to one
neighbourhood, who meet and save
regularly. Saving per member varies
from Rs 25 to Rs 100 or more,
depending on the ability of the people
to save. Members can take small loans
from the group itself to meet their
needs. The group charges interest on
these loans but this is still less than
what the moneylender charges. After
a year or two, if the group is regular
in savings, it becomes eligible for
availing loan from the bank.
Loan is sanctioned in the
name of the group and is
meant to create self-
employment opportunities
for the members. For
instance, small loans are
provided to the members for
releasing mortgaged land,
for meeting working capital
needs (e.g. buying seeds,
fertilisers, raw materials
like bamboo and cloth), for
housing materials, for
acquiring assets like sewing
machine, handlooms, cattle,
etc.Most of the importantdecisions regarding the
savings and loan activities
are taken by the group
members. The group
decides as regards the loansto be granted Š the purpose, amount,
interest to be charged, repayment
schedule etc.  Also, it is the group
which is responsible for the repayment
of the loan. Any case of non-
repayment of loan by any one
member is followed up seriously by
other members in the group. Because
of this feature, banks are willing to
lend to the poor women when
organised in SHGs, even though they
have no collateral as such.Thus, the SHGs help borrowersovercome the problem of lack of
collateral. They can get timely loans
for a variety of purposes and at a
reasonable interest rate. Moreover,SHGs are the building blocks of
organisation of the rural poor. Notonly does it help women to become
financially self-reliant, the regular
meetings of the group provide a
platform to discuss and act on a
variety of social issues such as health,
nutrition, domestic violence, etc.A women™s self-help groupmeeting in Gujarat
In this chapter we have looked at themodern forms of money and how they
are linked with the banking system.On one side are the depositors who
keep their money in the banks and on
the other side are the borrowers who
take loans from these banks. Economicactivities require loans or credit. Credit,as we saw can have a positive impact,
or in certain situations make the
borrower worse off.Credit is available from a variety ofsources. These can be either formal
sources or informal sources. Terms ofGrameen Bank of BangladeshGrameen Bank of BangladeshGrameen Bank of BangladeshGrameen Bank of BangladeshGrameen Bank of BangladeshﬁIf credit can be made available tothe poor people on terms andconditions that are appropriate and
reasonable these millions of small
people with their millions of small
pursuits can add up to create the
biggest development wonder.ﬂProfessor Muhammad Yunus,the founder of Grameen Bank,and recipient of 2006 Nobel Prize for PeaceSUMMING UPcredit vary substantially betweenformal and informal lenders. At
present, it is the richer householdswho receive credit from formal sourceswhereas the poor have to depend onthe informal sources. It is essentialthat the total formal sector creditincreases so that the dependence on
the more expensive informal creditbecomes less. Also, the poor shouldget a much greater share of formalloans from banks, cooperativesocieties etc. Both these steps areimportant for development.Grameen Bank of Bangladesh is one of thebiggest success stories in reaching the poor to
meet their credit needs at reasonable rates.
Started in the 1970s as a small project,
Grameen Bank in October 2014 has over 8.63
million members in about 81,390 villages spread
across Bangladesh. Almost all of the borrowers
are women and belong to poorest sections of
the society. These borrowers have proved that
not only are poor women reliable borrowers, but
that they can start and run a variety of small
income-generating activities successfully.EXERCISES1.In situations with high risks, credit might create further problems for the borrower.Explain.2.How does money solve the problem of double coincidence of wants? Explain withan example of your own.3.How do banks mediate between those who have surplus money and those who
need money?4.Look at a 10 rupee note. What is written on top? Can you explain this statement?5.Why do we need to expand formal sources of credit in India?6.What is the basic idea behind the SHGs for the poor? Explain in your own words.7.What are the reasons why the banks might not be willing to lend to certain borrowers?5252
5252
52UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT
