We use different things in our daily life madefrom metal. Can you list a number of itemsused in your house made of metals. Where dothese metals come from?You have studied that the earth™s crust ismade up of different minerals embedded in the
rocks. Various metals are extracted from theseminerals after proper refinement.Minerals are an indispensable part of ourlives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin
to a towering building or a big ship, all are
made from minerals. The railway lines and thetarmac (paving) of the roads, our implementsand machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are
manufactured from minerals and run on
power resources derived from the earth. Even
the food that we eat contains minerals. In all
stages of development, human beings have
used minerals for their livelihood, decoration,
festivities, religious and ceremonial rites.Haban comes to Guwahati with his father
from a remote village.He sees people getting into strangehouse like objects which move along the
road. He also sees a ﬁkitchenﬂ dragging anumber of house along with it. He is amazed
and asked his father ﬁWhy don™t our housesmove like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?ﬂBa replies, ﬁThese are not houses, theyare buses and trains. Unlike our houses theseare not made of bricks and stones, metal likeiron and alluminium are used in making
these. They do not move on their own. Theyare driven by an engine which needs energyto work.ﬂA bright smile from toothpasteand mineralsToothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasiveminerals like silica, limestone, aluminium
oxide and various phosphate minerals do thecleaning. Fluoride which is used to reducecavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most
toothpaste are made white with titaniumoxide, which comes from minerals calledrutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle insome  toothpastes comes from mica. Thetoothbrush and tube containing the paste are
made of plastics from petroleum.  Find outwhere these minerals are found?Dig a little deeper and find out how manyminerals are used to make a light bulb?All living things need mineralsLife processes cannot occur without minerals.Although our mineral intake represents onlyabout 0.3 per cent of our total intake ofnutrients, they are so potent and so importantthat without them we would not be able toutilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.Dig a little deeper and collect ﬁNutritionalFactsﬂ printed on food labels.What is a mineral?Geologists define mineral as a ﬁhomogenous,naturally occurring substance with a definableinternal structure.ﬂ Minerals are found invaried forms in nature, ranging from thehardest diamond to the softest talc. Why arethey so varied?
