Democracy  and  Diversity
29Chapter 3Democracy
and
Diversity
Overview
In the last chapter, we saw 
how power can be distributed to
accommodate linguistic and regional diversities. But language and
region are not the only features that give a distinct identity to
people. Sometimes, people also identify themselves and relate with
others on the basis of their physical appearance, class, religion,
gender, caste, tribe, etc. In this chapter, we study how democ
racyresponds to social differences, divisions and inequalities. We begin
with an example of public expression of social divisions. We then
draw some general 
lessons about how soci
al differences can take
various forms. We then turn to how democratic politics affects and

is affected by these social diversities.

30Democratic Politics
A Story from Mexico OlympicsCivil Rights Movementin the USA (1954-1968)refers to a set of events
and reform
 movements
aimed at abolishing legal
racial discrimination
against 
African-Americans.
Led by Mar
tin LutherKing Jr., this mov
ementpracticed non-violentmethods of civil

disobedience against

racially 
discriminatory
laws and 
practices.African-American,
Afro-American, Black

American, or Black are the

terms used to re
fer mainlyto the descendants of
Africans who were

brought into America as
slaves between the 17
thcentury and early 19
thcentury.
The Black Power
movement emerged in
1966 and lasted till 1975,which was a more militant

anti-racist mov
ement,advocating 
even violence
if necessary 
to end racismin the US.
The pictures on this
page depict an
important landmark in
the history of the
 CIVILRIGHTS MOVEMENT
 INTHE UNITED STATES
.These represent the medal cer
emony
of the 200 metres race in the 1968Olympics held at Mexico City. The two
men standing with clenched fists

upraised and heads bowed, while the
American national anthem was
played, are 
the US athletes, T
ommieSmith and John Carlos. They are
AFRICAN-AMERICANS. They had won the
gold and bronze 
medals respectively.
They received 
their medals wearing
black  socks and no shoes to represent
Black poverty. W
ith this gesture, they
tried to draw inter
national a
ttention toracial discrimination in the UnitedStates. The black-gloved and raised
clenched fists were meant to symbolise
BLACK
 POWER
. The silver medallist,
white Austral
ian athlete, Peter Nor
man,wore a human rights badge on his shirt
during the ceremony to show his
support 
to the two Americans.
Do you think that Carlos and
Smith should have raised an internal

matter of American society in aninternational for
um? Would you say
that what they 
did was political? Why
do you think Peter Norman, who was
neither Black nor American, joined in
the gesture of 
protest? If you were in
Norman™s place what would you do?
In 2005, the San Jose State University installed a 20-foot high sculpture representing the
protest by Tommie Smith and John Carlos. A photograph of the original medal ceremonyin 1968 is on the top.My salute toCarlos and
Smith! Will I ever
have the courage
to do what they
did?© wikipedia & photo flickr.com Kevin
Democracy  and  Diversity
31The Interna
tional OlympicAssociation held Carlos and Smith guiltyof violating the Olympic spirit by

making a political statement. Their

medals were taken bac
k. Back home,
they were subjected to a lot of criticism.
Norman too suffered for his action and

was not included in the Austr
alian teamfor the next Ol
ympic. 
But their actionsucceeded in gaining international
attention for 
the Civil Rights Movement
in the US. Recentl
y, the San Jose
(pronounced ‚Saan Hoze™) State
University, of which they were former
students, 
honoured them 
and installedtheir statue in the University campus.

When Norman died in 2006, 
Smith andCarlos were pallbearers at his funeral.
Some Dalit groups decided to participate in the UN ConferenceAgainst Racism in Durban in 2001, demanding the inclusion of castein the agenda of this conference. Here are three reactions to this move:
Amandeep Kaur (a government official): Our Constitution declares
caste discrimination to be illegal. If some caste discriminationcontinues, it is an internal matter. I am opposed to this being raised in

an international forum.
Oinam (a sociologist): I am opposed to this because caste and race are
not similar divisions. Caste is a social division, while race is a biological

one. Raising caste in this conference on racism would mean equating

the two.

Ashok (a Dalit activist): The argument about internal matter is away of preventing open discussion of oppression and
discrimination. Race is not purely biological. It is as much a legaland sociological category as caste. Caste discrimination must be
raised in this conference.
Which of the three opinions do you agree with most and why?
Differences, similarities, divisionsThe athletes in the e
xample above were
responding to social divisions and
social inequalities. But does that

happen only in societies 
which have
racial divisions? In the previous two
chapters we have already noted some

other forms of social divisions. The

examples of Belgium and Sri Lankashow both regional and social divisions.
In the case of Belgium we noted that

people who live in differ
ent re
gionsspeak different langua
ges. In Sri Lanka,
we noted linguistic as 
well as religious
differences. T
hus social diver
sity cantake different forms in different
societies.I met this groupof girls from
Pakistan and feltthat I had morein common with
them than many
girls from other
parts of my own
country. Is this

anti-national to
feel so?
32Democratic Politics
A cartoon like this can be read by differentpeople to mean different things. What does
this cartoon mean to you? How do other
students in your class read this?Origins of social 
differences
These social differ
ences are mostly
based on accident of birth. Normally
we don™t choose to belong to our

community. We belong to it simply

because we were born into it. We all
experience social differences based on
accident of birth in our everyday lives.

People around us ar
e male or female,
they are tall and short, have different

kinds of complexions, or have different
physical abilities or disabilities. But all

kinds of social differences are not
based on accident of birth. Some of

the differences are based on ourchoices. For example, some people are

atheists. They don™t believe in God or

any religion. Some people choose to
follow a religion other than the one in
which they were born. Most of us

choose what to study, which

occupation to take up and which

games or cultural activities to take part
in. All these lead to fo
rmation 
of social
groups that are 
based on our choices.
Every social dif
ference does not
lead to social division. 
Socialdifferences divide similar people from

one another, but the
y also unite very
different people. People belonging to

different social 
groups share
differences and similarities cutting
across the boundaries of their gr
oups.
In the instance above, Carlos and
Smith were similar in one way (both

were African-American) and thus

different from Nor
man who was
white. But they we
re also all similar inother ways Œ they were 
all athletes who
stood against 
racial discrimination.It is fairly common for peoplebelonging to the same religion to feel
that they do not belong to the same
community, 
because their caste or sectis very different. It is also possible for
people from different religions to have

the same caste and feel c
lose to eachother. Rich 
and poor persons from the
same family often do not keep c
loserelations with each other for they feel

they are very different. Thus, we all

have more than one identity and can

belong to more than one social group.

We have different identities in different

contexts.
© Ares - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Democracy  and  Diversity
33Overlapping and cross-cutting
differences
Social division takes place when some
social differ
ence overla
ps with otherdifferences.  T
he difference between
the Blacks and Whites becomes a social
division in the US because the Blacks
tend to be poor, homeless and

discriminated against. 
In our countryDalits tend to be poor and landless.
They often f
ace discrimination and
injustice. 
Situations of this kind
produce social divisions
, when one
kind of social difference becomes
more important than the other and

people start feeling that they belong to
different 
communities.
If social differences cross cut oneanother, it is diff
icult to pit one group
of people against 
the other. It means
that groups tha
t share a common
interest on one issue are likely to be in
different sides on a different issue.

Consider the cases of Northern
Ireland and the Netherlands. Both are

predominantly Christian 
but 
divided
between Catholics and 
Protestants. In
Northern Ir
eland, c
lass and religion
overlap with each other. If you are
Catholic, you are also more likely to be

poor, and you may have suffered a

history of
 discrimination. In the
Netherlands, c
lass and religion tend to
cut across each 
other. Catholics and
Protestants are about equally likely to

be poor or rich. The result is that

Catholics and Protestants 
have had
conflicts in Northern Ir
eland, w
hilethey do not do so in the Netherlands.

Overlapping social differences create

possibilities of dee
p social divisions
and tensions. 
Cross-cutting social
differences are easier to accommodate.
Social divisions of 
one kind oranother exist in most countries. It does

not matter whether the country is small
or big. India is a vast country with many

communities. 
Belgium is a small country
with many 
communities. Even those
countries such as Germany and Sweden,

that were once highly 
HOMOGENEOUS, are
undergoing ra
pid change with influx of
people from other parts of the world.
MIGRANTS bring with them their own
culture and tend to form a different
social community. In this sense most

countries of the world 
are multi-cultural.
Homogeneous society:A society that has similar
kinds of 
people,
especially where thereare no significant ethnic
differences.

Migrant: Anybody whoshifts from one regionor country to anotherregion within a country

or to another country,

usually for work or other

economic opportunities.Read these two poems by Dalit writers. Why do you think theposter is titled ‚Hidden Apartheid™ ?

34Democratic Politics
Politics of social divisions
How do these social divisions affect
politics? What does politics do to these

social divisions? At first sight, it would

appear that the combination of politics
and social divisions is very dangerous
and explosive. 
Democracy involves
competition among various political
parties. Their competition tends to

divide any society. 
If they start
competing in terms of some existing

social divisions, it 
can make social
divisions into political divisions and

lead to conflict, violence or even

disintegra
tion of a country. This has
happened in many countries.
Range of outcomes
Take the case of Northern Ireland that
we referred to ab
ove. T
his region ofthe United Kingdom has been for manyyears the site of a violent and bitterethno-political conflict. Its populationis divided into two major sects of
Christianity: 53 per cent areProtestants, while 44 per cent are
Roman Catholics. T
he Catholics were
represented by Na
tionalist parties who
demanded that Northern Ireland be
unified with the Repub
lic of Ireland,
a predominantly Catholic country. The
Protestants were represented by

Unionists who wanted to remain with
the UK, which is predominantly
protestant. Hundr
eds of ci
vilians,
militants and security forces were killed
in the fight between Unionists and

Nationalists and between the security

forces of the 
UK and the Nationalists.It was only in 1998, that the UK
government 
and the Nationalists
Imrana is a student of Class X, section B. She and all her classmates are
planning to help students of Class XI in giving a farewell party to thestudents of Class XII. Last month she played for section team in a game of
kho-kho against the team of Class X, section A. She goes back home in a busand joins all the students from various classes. They all come from trans-

Yamuna area in Delhi. Back home, she often joins her elder sister, Naima, in

complaining against her brother who does no work at home, while the sisters
are asked to help their mother. Her father is looking for a good match for her

elder sister, from a Muslim family with a similar economic status from their

own ‚biradari™.
Can you list the various kinds of identities Imrana has?
At homeshe isa 
girlIn terms of religionshe is
––––.In the schoolshe is––––.–––––she 
is––––
–––––.she 
is––––.
Democracy  and  Diversity
35India?India?India?India?India?RomaniaRomaniaRomaniaRomaniaRomaniaorororororBulgaria,Bulgaria,Bulgaria,Bulgaria,Bulgaria,Ganesh had come back from his trip and was talking to Mahashwetaabout the Roma people who live in many countries of Eastern
Europe. He met Yordanka who works as a nurse in Bulgaria. This iswhat she has to say about Roma people:
ﬁBeing a nurse you can™t refuse to look after some people, butthese Roma people are very dirty. Even when something small
happens to any one in 
their family, all the family and even theneighbours just march to our hospital. And once they are in the hospitalthey don™t know how to keep quiet. They talk aloud, smoke and drop ashes all
over and spit on the wall! They have no patience, and they just start pestering our
doctors! And when they are just hanging out like that any way they look so

aggressive. After all these dark skinned people don™t look like us. They have a
strange sense of colour. Look at their dress, 
why can™t they 
try to look like
everyone else in the country? And we all 
know they are thieves. I have heard
people say that these Roma people live by selling their blood. None of them can
afford the hospital fees. But when they are ill they just rush to hospital at the cost
of good Bulgarians who pay their taxes!ﬂ
ﬁThat sounds familiar™ said Mahashweta.
Ganesh went on to talk about Modruzeni, a Romani who lives in Romania. When
she was 
eighteen years old, she went to the hospital, to give birth to her first
child. She had no money to pay to the doctor or nurse. Though she was in thehospital, nobody bothered to come and take care of her. Finally the sweeper, who

was also a Romani, helped her give birth 
to a boy. And then the nurse appeared on
the scene and said, ﬁHere we have another criminalﬂ. Talking about how the Roma

people are treated in public hospitals, she says: ﬁThese doctors keep us waitingoutside their cabins. On one occasion one doctor asked me to take a bath if Ineeded to be examined! Of course, I smelled. During the pregnancy I atefrom the garbage containers, because I was so hungry all the time. Myhusband had left me. I had two children, and I was pregnant with thethird.The social worker refused my request for food assistance. My neighbour
helped me to deliver the baby. I often feel it is better not to visit these
hospitals.ﬂ
Mahashweta heard him out and said, ﬁGanesh, why do you have to travel
halfway across the world to find this out? This is not a story about Romania
and Bulgaria or about the Roma people. This is as much a story about our
own country and about our people who are branded as criminals by our
system.ﬂ
Do you think Mahashweta is right? Do you know of some community
in your area that is treated like the Romas?
Have you heard people sa
y things similar to what Yordanka orModruzeni say here? If yes, try to 
think of what the story would sound like if
you heard it from the other side?
Do you think the Bulgarian government should try to ensure that theRoma people dress and behave like other people from Bulgaria?
