UNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTUNDERSTANDINGANDINGANDINGANDINGANDINGECONOMICECONOMICECONOMICECONOMICECONOMICDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTSOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS X
First EditionDecember 2006Agrahayana 1928ReprintedDecember 2007Agrahayana 1929February  2000Magha 1930January   2010Magha 1931January  2011    Magha 1932January  2012Magha 1933November 2012Kartika 1934January 2014   Magha 1935
November 2013 Kartika 1935PD 480T RNB© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006` ` ` ` ` 00.00Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERTwatermarkPublished at the Publication Division bythe Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at .....ISBN  81-7450-655-1ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDqNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher™s consent, in anyform of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revisedprice indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrectand should be unacceptable.OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATIONDIVISION, NCERTNCERT CampusSri Aurobindo MargNew  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli ExtensionBanashankari III StageBengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.NavjivanAhmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihatiKolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454CWC ComplexMaligaonGuwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869Publication TeamHead, Publication:Ashok SrivastavaDivisionChief Production:Kalyan BanerjeeOfficerChief Business:Gautam GangulyManager
Chief Editor:Naresh Yadav(Contractual Service)
Editor:R. N. Bhardawaj(Contractual Service)Production Officer:Arun ChitkaraCover, Layout and IllustrationsKaren Haydock
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends thatchildren™s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning,which continues to shape our system, and causes a gap between theschool, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developedon the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea.They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance ofsharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope thesemeasures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centered system of education outlined in the National Policy onEducation (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principalsand teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their ownlearning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We mustrecognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate newknowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them byadults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis ofexamination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sitesof learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possibleif we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not asreceivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and modeof functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary asrigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the requirednumber of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methodsused for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective thistextbook proves for making children™s life at school a happy experience,rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers havetried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuringand reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater considerationfor child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbookattempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and spaceto opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in smallgroups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook developmentcommittee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairpersonof the advisory committee for textbooks in Social Sciences, at thesecondary level, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor forthis book, Professor Tapas Majumdar for guiding the work of thiscommittee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this
(iv)textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible.We are indebted to the institutions and organisations, which havegenerously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material andpersonnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the NationalMonitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondaryand Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Developmentunder the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P.Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As anorganisation committed to systemic reform and continuousimprovement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes commentsand suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revisionand refinement.DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of Educational20 November 2006Research and Training
(v)A FEW INTRODUCTORY WORDS FOR TEACHERSThis book introduces you to a simplified view of the process of development inthe Indian economy. In Economics, we usually try to look at development as aprocess of change in the economic life of the people, as producers or consumersof goods and services. Sometimes, development is studied mainly as aphenomenon that acquired significance only with the growth of the modernindustrial civilisation. This is because the state of development (orunderdevelopment) of a country has often depended on outcomes of wars andconquests and on colonial exploitation of one country by another. However, inthis book, we have not emphasised on the external factors. We have taken along view of the process of development: a process that could have startedbefore any external factors intervened or interrupted it. The process ofdevelopment may also restart after such interruptions, and continue onindependent lines after the period of subjugation ends. This has happened inthe case of our own country, India.In this book the first beginnings of development are seen in terms of theemergence of agriculture, manufacturing and services as three distinct sectorsof the economy. We have also tried to look at economic development not inisolation but as part of a more general concept of human development thatincludes the development of health and education and other indicators that,along with income, broadly define the quality of life of a people.In the first chapter, we will study how people actually perceive developmentand how it can be measured. There are various measures available for thispurpose. We will look at the extent to which some of the important developmentalindicators help in understanding development and how the process may affectdifferent people differently.Development as a process had probably started quite early in history. Tobegin with, perhaps no country could be distinguished as developed in thesense that we understand development. Perhaps the process would have startedin most human settlements when people started living in relative peace and inmore or less fixed habitations without which agriculture would not have beenpossible on any significant scale. Once agriculture began and developed, theextraction of other natural products, like mineral ores, probably was started.This latter process of recovering stones and other minerals is called ‚quarrying™.Humans learnt to use the non-food products like wood from trees and theminerals obtained from quarrying as raw materials for making their tools,weapons, utensils, fishing nets and so on. These were the first human-madeproducts called ‚artefacts™. Economists called the process of making the artefacts‚manufacture™ as distinguished from ‚agriculture (including quarrying)™ thatcovered the gathering, cultivating or extracting of purely natural products suchas fruit, rice or minerals.The separation of productive activities between the two distinct sectors ofagriculture including quarrying (also called the Primary Sector) and
(vi)manufacture (also called the Secondary Sector) was probably the first visiblemanifestation of economic development. This separation came about throughthe process of ﬁdivision of labourﬂ as Adam Smith, regarded as the father ofeconomics had called it. The process is briefly explained below.At first every person, or at least members of every household, presumably,had to do everything all by themselves. Then at some point the advantage of‚division of labour™ must have been felt. Humans found out with experiencethat production became more efficient if some people concentrated on learninghow to fish, others on how to till the soil, still others on how to producepottery, or trap or hunt animals and birds for food and so on. This was also‚development™ of a kind. Then there emerged specialists who were notthemselves producing any good at all: they were people specialising inteaching others how to do these things better. There were also doctors whohealed people when they were injured or had fallen ill. Naturally division oflabour between people increased the productivity of all the people and theeconomy grew.The second chapter will look at the way economic activities in a moderneconomy can be classified and understood within the framework of primary,secondary and tertiary sectors. The discussion here is focussed on India andthe changes that have occurred in the three sectors over the past decades. Besidesthis, it also provides two other ways of classifying economic activities Š organisedand unorganised, and private and public sectors. The relevance of additionalways of classification for understanding the problems and challenges of themodern Indian economy is illustrated using real life examples and case studies.The third chapter initiates the learners into the world of money Š its role ina modern economy, forms and its linkage with various institutions such asbanks. Then the chapter moves on to discuss the role of banks and otherinstitutions in providing credit to the people. Issues stressed in the discussionon credit are (a) pervasiveness of credit in economic life across a very largesection of the population (b) the preponderance of informal credit in India and(c) role of credit in creating either a self-sustaining virtuous cycle of productiveinvestment, higher income streams, higher standards of living leading to moreproductive investments contributing to development, or a vicious cycle ofindebtedness, poverty and debt-trap leading to increased poverty. These ideasare presented through case studies.Globalisation is an important phenomenon, which has influenceddevelopment and people around the world in various ways. The fourth chapterfocuses on a particular dimension of globalisation that is economic in natureŠ the complex organisation of production. How multinational companiesfacilitate globalisation through trade and investment is also explained. Someimportant factors and institutions that facilitate globalisation also find placein this chapter. In the end, the chapter appraises the impacts of globalisation(positive and negative) on the Indian economy.The process of development leads to not only higher levels of production indifferent sectors of the economy, but has some down sides too. The examplesand case studies in this chapter and elsewhere try to examine whether thebenefits of development are spreading to all people (producers big and small,workers in the organised or unorganised sectors, consumers belonging to allLabour is thesource of allwealth
