NOTES FOR THE TEACHERThis chapter proposes to discuss the issue ofconsumer rights within the context of the ways
markets operate in our country. There are many
aspects of unequal situations in a market and
poor enforcement of rules and regulations. Hence,there is a need to sensitise learners and encourage
them to participate in the consumer movement.
This chapter provides case histories Œ how someconsumers were exploited  in a real life situationand how legal institutions helped consumers  ingetting compensated and in upholding their rights
as consumers. The case histories would enable
the students to link these narratives to their life
experiences. We have to enable students tounderstand that the awareness of being a well-
informed consumer arose out of consumer
movement and active participation of people
through their struggles over a long period. This
chapter also provides details of a few
organisations helping consumers in differentways. Finally it ends with some critical issues of
the consumer movement in India.Aspects of Teaching / Sources of InformationThis chapter has questions, case studies andactivities. It would be preferred that students
discuss these in groups orally. Some of these
could be answered in writing individually.While carrying out each activity you couldstart with a brainstorming session about the
activity. Similarly there are many opportunities
for role-play in this chapter and this could be auseful way to share their experiences andunderstand the issues at a deeper level. Making
posters collectively is another way to think about
these issues. This lesson contains activities,
which require visits Œ visit to consumer
protection councils, consumer organisations,consumer court, retail shops, market places, etc.Organise the visits to maximise learners™
experience.  Have a discussion with them about
the purpose of the visit, things they need to do
beforehand and things that need to be collectedand the task (report/ project / article, etc.) theywould carry out after the visit. As part of this
chapter, the learners may do letter-writing andspeaking activities. We may have to be sensitiveto the language aspect of exercises.This chapter contains materials collectedfrom authenticated websites, books, newspapers
and magazines. For example, http://www.mca.gov.in is a website of CentralGovernment Ministry of Consumer Affairs.
Another website www.cuts-international.org is thewebsite of a consumer organisation working in
India for more than 20 years. It publishes avariety of materials to create consumerawareness in India. They need to be sharedamong learners so that they can also collect
materials as part of their activities. For example,
case histories were taken from newspaperclippings and consumers who fought inconsumer courts. Let learners collect and read
such materials from different sources: consumer
protection councils, consumer courts and
internet.CHAPTER 5 : CONSUMER RIGHTS7474
7474
74UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT
CONSUMER RIGHTSCONSUMER RIGHTSCONSUMER RIGHTSCONSUMER RIGHTSCONSUMER RIGHTSCHAPTER 5The collage you see below containssome news clippings of consumer
court verdicts. Why did the people go
to the consumer court in these cases?
These verdicts came about because
some people persisted and struggled
to get justice. In what ways were they
denied justice? More importantly,what are the ways in which they can
exercise their rights as consumers to
get a fair deal from the sellers when
they felt they had been denied a just
treatment?
We participate in the market both asproducers and consumers. Asproducers of goods and services we
could be working in any of the sectors
discussed earlier such as agriculture,
industry, or services. Consumers
participate in the market when they
purchase goods and services that they
need. These are the final goods that
people as consumers use.In the preceding chapters wediscussed the need for rules and
regulations or steps that would
promote development. These could be
for the protection of workers in the
unorganised sector or to protect
people from high interest rates
charged by moneylenders  in the
informal sector. Similarly, rules andregulations are also required for
protecting the environment.For example, moneylenders in theinformal sector that you read about
in Chapter 3 adopt various tricks to
bind the borrower: they could make
the producer sell the produce to them
at a low rate in return for a timely loan;
they could force a small farmer like
Swapna to sell her land to pay back
the loan. Similarly, many people who
work in the unorganised sector have
to work at a low wage and accept
conditions that are not fair and are
also often harmful to their health. To
prevent such exploitation, we
have talked of rules and regulations
for their protection. There are
organisations that have struggled
for long to ensure that these rules are
followed.THE CONSUMER IN THE MARKETPLACELikewise, rules and regulations arerequired for the protection of the
consumers in the marketplace.
Individual consumers often find
themselves in a weak position.
Whenever there is a complaint
regarding a good or service that had
been bought, the seller tries to shift
all the responsibility on to the buyer.Their position usually is Œ ﬁIf you
didn™t like what you bought, please
go elsewhereﬂ. As if the seller has no
responsibility once a sale is
completed! The consumer movement,
as we shall discuss later, is an effortto change this situation.Exploitation in the marketplacehappens in various ways. For
example, sometimes traders indulge
in unfair trade practices such as when
shopkeepers weigh less than what
they should or when traders add
charges that were not mentioned
before, or when adulterated/defective
goods are sold.Markets do not work in a fairmanner when producers are few and
powerful whereas consumers
purchase in small amounts and are
scattered. This happens especially
when large companies are producing
these goods. These companies with
huge wealth, power and reach can
manipulate the market in various
ways. At times false information is
passed on through the media, and
other sources to attract consumers.
For example, a company for years
sold powder milk for babies all overTHEY PURPOSELY MADE ITSO IT WOULD FALL APARTAFTER A FEW MONTHS SOTHAT I WILL BUY A NEW ONE!
