NOTES FOR TEACHERSNOTES FOR THE TEACHERCHAPTER I : DEVELOPMENTDevelopment has many aspects. Thepurpose of this chapter is to enable
students to understand this idea. They
have to understand that people have
different perspectives on development and
there are ways by which we can arrive at
common indicators for development. To
do this, we have used situations that they
can respond to in an intuitive manner; we
have also presented analysis that is more
complex and macro in nature.How can countries or states becompared using some selected
development indicators is another
question that students would read about
in this chapter. Economic developmentcan be measured and income is the most
common method for measuring
development. However, the incomemethod, though useful, has several
weaknesses. Hence, we need newer ways
of looking at development using indicators
of quality of life and environmental
sustainability.It is necessary for you to expect thestudents to respond actively in the
classroom and on a topic such as the
above, there would be wide variation in
opinion and possibility of debate. Allow
students to argue their point of view. At
the end of each section there are a few
questions and activities. These serve two
purposes: first, they recap the ideas
discussed in the section and second, theyenable better understanding of the themesdiscussed by bringing the learners closer
to their real-life situations.There are certain terms used in thischapter that would require clarification ŠPer Capita Income, Literacy Rate, InfantMortality Rate, Attendance Ratio, LifeExpectancy, Gross Enrolment Ratio, andHuman Development Index. Though datapertaining to these terms are provided,
these would need further explanation. Youmay also need to clarify the concept of
purchasing power parity that is used tocalculate per capita income in Table 1.6.It is necessary to keep in mind that these
terms are used as an aid to the discussionand not something to be memorised.Sources for InformationThe data for this chapter is taken fromreports published by the Government of
India (Economic Survey), United NationsDevelopment Programme (HumanDevelopment Report) and World Bank(World Development Indicators). Thesereports are being published every year. Itmay be interesting to look up these reportsif they are available in your school library.If not, you may log on to the websites of
these institutions (www.budgetindia.nic.in,www.undp.org, www.worldbank.org).Data is also available from the ReserveBank™s Handbook of Statistics on IndianEconomy, available at www.rbi.org).22
22
2UU

UU
UNDERSTNDERST
NDERSTNDERST
NDERSTANDINGANDING

ANDINGANDING
ANDING E E
 E E
 ECONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMICCONOMIC D D

 D D
 DEVELEVEL
EVELEVEL
EVELOPMENTOPMENT

OPMENTOPMENT
OPMENT
DD
DD
DEVELOPMENTEVELOPMENTEVELOPMENTEVELOPMENTEVELOPMENT33

33
3The idea of development or progresshas always been with us. We haveaspirations or desires about what we
would like to do and how we would
like to live. Similarly, we have ideas
about what a country should be like.
What are the essential things that we
require? Can life be better for all? How
should people live together? Can there
be more equality? Development
involves thinking about these
questions and about the ways in
which we can work towards achieving
these goals. This is a complex
task and in this chapter we shall
make a beginning at understanding
development. You will learn moreabout these issues in greater depth
in higher classes. Also, you will find
answers to many of these questions
not just in economics but also in your
course in history and political science.
This is because the way we live today
is influenced by the past. We can™tdesire for change without being aware
of this. In the same way, it is only
through a democratic political
process that these hopes and
possibilities can be achieved in
real life.DEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTDEVELOPMENTCHAPTER IﬁWithout me they cannot develop...in this system I cannot develop!ﬂ
