Chapter 6RuralAdministrationA Quarrel in the Village
ohan is a farmer. His family

owns a small agricultural field,which they have been farming for
many years. Next to his field is Raghu's
land which is separated from his by a

small boundary called a bund.One morning Mohan noticed that
Raghu had shifted the bund by a fewfeet. By doing so, he had managed totake over some of Mohan's land, and
increased the size of his own field.

Mohan was angry but also a little
frightened.  Raghu's family owned
many fields and besides, his uncle
was also the Sarpanch of the village.
But even so, he plucked up courage
and went to Raghu's house.A heated argument followed.Raghu refused to accept that he had

moved the bund. He called one of his
helpers and they began shouting at
Mohan and beating him up. The
neighbours heard the commotion

and rushed to the spot where Mohan

was being beaten up. They took him
away.He was badly hurt on his headand hand.  He was given first aid byone of his neighbours.  His friend,
who also ran the village post-office,
suggested that they go to the local
police station and file a report.
Others were doubtful if this was a good

idea because they felt they wouldwaste a lot of money and nothing
would come out of it.  Some people said
that Raghu's family would have
already contacted the police station.
After much discussion it wasdecided that Mohan would go to thepolice station along with some of the
neighbours who had seen the incident. There are more than six lakh villages in India.
Taking care of their needs for water, electricity,

road connections, is not a small task. In addition
to this, land records have to be maintained and
conflicts too need to be dealt with. A large
machinery is in place to deal with all this. In this
chapter we will look at the work of two rural
administrative officers in some detail.
M  Area of the Police Station
On the way to the police station one ofthe neighbours asked, "Why don't wespend some more money and go to the

main police station in the town?" "It is not a question of money. We
can register the case only in this police
station because our village comes in its
area of work," explained Mohan.
Every police station has an area
that comes under its control.  All

persons in that area can report cases or
inform the police about any theft,
accident, injury, fight, etc. It is the
responsibility of the police of that

station to enquire, to investigate and

take action on the cases within its area.
The work at the Police StationWhen they reached the police station
Mohan went to the person in charge
(Station House Officer or S.H.O.) and

told him what had happened. He also
said that he wanted to give the
complaint in writing. The S.H.O rudely
brushed him aside saying that he
couldn't be bothered to waste his time

writing down minor complaints andthen investigating them. Mohanshowed him his injuries but the S.H.O
did not believe him.Mohan was puzzled and did notknow what to do.  He was not sure why

his complaint was not being recorded.

He went and called his neighbours into
the office. They argued strongly that

Mohan had been beaten up in front of

them and had they not rescued him he
would have been injured very
seriously. They insisted that the case
be registered. Finally the officer agreed.

He asked Mohan to write down his
complaint and also told the people that
he would send a constable the next day
to investigate the incident.1. If there is a theft in your house
which police station would you go
to register your complaint?
2. What was the dispute betweenMohan and Raghu?3. Why was Mohan worried aboutpicking a quarrel with Raghu?
4. Some people said Mohan should
report the matter to the police and

others said he should not. What
were the arguments they gave?
Show the above situation in thepolice station through a skit. 
Then talk about how you feltplaying Mohan's role or that of the

S.H.O or the neighbours. Could theS.H.O have handled the situationdifferently? 
50/ 
Social and Political Life  Maintenance of Land Records
You saw that Mohan and Raghu were
arguing heatedly whether the commonboundary of their fields had beenshifted. Isn't there a way by which they

could have settled this dispute in a
peaceful manner? Are there records

that show who owns what land in thevillage? Let's find out how this is done. Measuring land and keeping landrecords is the main work of the

Patwari. The Patwari is known by
different names in different states - in
some villages such officers are 
called Lekhpal, in others  Kanungo orKaramchari or Village Officer etc. We
will refer to this officer as Patwari.

Each Patwari is responsible for a
group of villages. The Patwari
maintains and updates the records of

the village.The map and the corresponding
details from the register on the next
page are a small part of the records

kept by the Patwari.The Patwari usually has ways of
measuring agricultural fields. In some
places a long chain is used. In the
above instance the Patwari would have
measured both Mohan's and Raghu's

fields and compared them with the

measurements on the map. If they did

not match then it would be clear that
the boundary of the fields has been
changed. 
The Patwari is also responsible for
organising the collection of landrevenue from the farmers and

providing information to the govern-

ment about the crops grown in this

area. This is done from the records

that are kept, and this is why it's

important for the Patwari to regularly

update these. Farmers may change

the crops grown on their fields or

someone may dig a well somewhere,
Find out the term used for the Patwari
in your state.If you live in a rural area find out:
How many villages does the Patwari of
your area maintain land records of?
How do people in the village contacthim/her?Rural Administration/ 51  The Khasra record of the Patwari gives you information regarding the map givenbelow. It identifies which plot of land is owned by whom. Look at both the records and

the map and answer the questions given below regarding Mohan and Raghu's land.1456238752/ 
Social and Political Life1. Who owns the land south ofMohan's field?2. Mark the common boundarybetween Mohan's and Raghu's lands.3. Who can use field no 3?
4. What  information can one get for
field no 2 and field no 3?Sketch map Œ not to scaleNORTH
BoundaryWell
GrasslandKachcha RoadPakka road
Tree
Legend|||
||
||
||
|||||
||
||No.Area inhectare
Name of owner,

Father orhusband's name,
addressIf it is rentedto some other
farmer,
their nameand rent
receivedArea cultivatedthis yearCropgrownAreaSec-ond
cropgrownKhasra 5FacilitiesAreanot
culti-vatedfallow
land0.75Mohan, Son of Raja NoSoya-0.75
Ram, Villagebean
Hectare
Amrapura owner3.00Raghu Ram, Son ofNoSoya-2.75     0.25
Ratan Lall, Villagebean, 
Hectare
Amrapura ownerWheat,1.75 Well -1
irriga-working
ted6.00Madhya PradeshNo–Well -1
Governmentworking
GrasslandGrazing
VILLAGE - AMRAPURA
PATWARI RECORD - 16
  and keeping track of all this is thework of the revenue department of

the government. Senior people in
this department supervise thePatwari's work. All states in India are divided
into districts. For managing matters
relating to land these districts are
further sub-divided. These sub-
divisions of a district are known by

different names such as tehsil,

taluka, etc. At the head is the
District Collector and under her are

the revenue officers, also known as

tehsildars. They  have to hear
disputes. They also supervise the
work of the Patwaris and ensure

that records are properly kept and

land revenue is collected. They

make sure that the farmers can

easily obtain a copy of their record,

students can obtain their caste
certificates etc. The Tehsildar's

office is where land disputes are

also heard.
A daughter's wishFather inherited our housefrom his father
And everyone says he'llleave it to brother
But what about me and mymother?To expect a share in my
father's home,Is not very womanly, I amtold.But I really want a place of
my own,Not dowry of silk and gold.(Source: Reflections on MY FAMILY, 
Anjali Monteiro,TISS)
Farmers often require a copy of their land's
record together with a map, as shown in

the previous illustration. They have a right
to this information. They may have to pay
a small fee for this.However, this information is not easily
made available and farmers sometimes
have to face many problems to get it. In

some states, records are now being

computerised and also kept at the
Panchayat office so that they are more

easily available and regularly updated.
When do you think farmers may require a
copy of this record? Study the following

situations and identify the cases in which
these records would be necessary and why.
*  A farmer wants to buy a plot of land from
another.

* A farmer wants to sell her produce to

another.

*  A farmer wants a loan from the bank to

dig a well in her land.
*  A farmer wants to purchase fertilizers for

his field.
* A farmer wants to divide his property

among his children.
Rural Administration/ 53  54/ 
Social and Political LifeA New Law(Hindu Succession Amendment Act,
2005)Often when we think of farmers who
own land, we think of men. Women are

seen as people who work on the fields,
but not as people who own
agricultural land. Till recently in some
states Hindu women did not get a
share in the family's agricultural land.

After the death of the father his
property was divided equally only

among his sons.Recently, the law was changed. Inthe new law sons, daughters and their
mothers can get an equal share in the

land. The same law will apply to all
states and union territories of the
country. This law will benefit a large numberof women. For example Sudha is theeldest daughter of an agricultural
family. She is married and lives in a
neighbouring village. After her father's
death  Sudha often comes to help her
mother with the farming work.
Her mother has asked the Patwarito transfer the land and enter her
name along with the names of all the
children in his record.
Sudha's mother confidentlyorganises the farming with the help of

the  younger brother and sister.

Similarly Sudha also lives with the
assurance that if she ever has a
problem she can always depend upon

her share of the land.
Other Public Services - A surveyThis chapter has looked at some of the administrative work of thegovernment, especially for rural areas. The first example related to
maintaining law and order and the second to maintaining land records.

In the first case we examined the role of the police and in the second

that of the Patwari. This work is supervised by other people in the
department, such as the Tehsildar or the Superintendent of Police. We

have also seen how people use these services, and some of the problems
that they face. These services have to be used and made to function
according to the laws that have been framed for them. You have

probably seen many other public services and facilities provided by

various departments of the government.
Do the following exercise for your village/by visiting a nearby village or
looking at your own area.
List the public services in the village/area such as:  the milk society, the
fair price shop, the bank, the police station, the agricultural society for
seeds and fertiliser, the post office or sub post office, the anganwadi,

crèche, government school/s, health centre or government hospital etc.

Collect information on three public services and discuss with your

teacher how improvements can be made in their functioning. One

example has been worked out.  Rural Administration/ 55PublicserviceWhat did younotice abouttheir work?Area covered
What do theyneed to do inorder to use
the facility?Improvements
that can bemadeProblems
faced bythosemanagingtheserviceProblems
faced bypeopleFair-
priceshop(ratioshop)The shop wasopen. Three
people came.They all hadyellow cards.
They boughtsugar andrice. Kerosene
was notavailable.This shopcovers twovillages.They need aration card.
This has to bemade at thetehsil office.
There is
notenoughsupply ofkerosene.
Rice is ofvery badquality.We
never getkerosene.
Improve
quality ofrice. Makekerosene
available. The fair priceshop shouldbe kept openevery day.Healthcentre
Milksociety  56/ 
Social and Political LifeQUESTIONS1.What is the work of the police?  
2.List two things that the work of a Patwari includes.

3.What is the work of a tehsildar?
4.What issue is the poem trying to raise?  Do you think this is an
important issue?  Why?5.In what ways are the work of the Panchayat, that you read about in
the previous chapter, and the work of the Patwari related to each
other? 6.Visit a police station and find out the work that the police have to do
to prevent crime and maintain law and order in their area especially

during festivals, public meetings etc.7.Who is in charge of all the police stations in a district? Find out.
8.How do women benefit under the new law?

9.In your neighbourhood are there women who own property? How did
they acquire it? 
  