Chapter 4In this chapter you will read about some of
the key elements that influence the working
of a democratic government.  These include
people's participation, the resolution of
conflict and equality and justice.outh Africa is a country that haspeople of several races. There are
black people who belong to SouthAfrica, whites who came there to settle,
and Indians who came as labourers

and traders.  Maya Naidoo, an eleven-year oldSouth African girl living in the town ofJohannesburg, was helping her mother
clear up her old boxes. She found a
scrapbook full of pictures and

newspaper articles. There were many

pictures of a young schoolboy of around

fifteen years of age.  When she asked
her mother who the boy was, she was
told that he was called, Hector Pieterson.He had been shot by the police.  Mayawas shocked. "Why?" she asked. Her mother explained that SouthAfrica was earlier governed by
apartheid laws. Apartheid means
separation on the basis of race.  South
African people were divided into white,

black, Indian and coloured races.
According to the law, these races were

not allowed to mingle with each other, to

live near each other or even to use
common facilities.Maya could not believe her ears.Maya's mother sounded angry when
she spoke about life under apartheid.
She told Maya that in those daysSouth AfricaIndiaSKey Elements ofa Democratic
Government
  36/ 
Social and Political Lifehospitals were separate and so were
ambulances. An ambulance meant for
white people would always be wellequipped while one meant for blackpeople was not.  There were separate

trains and buses. Even the busstops
were different for black and white

people. Non-whites were not allowed to
vote. The best land in the country wasreserved for the white people, and non-

whites had to live on the worst
available land. Thus blacks andcoloured people were not considered to
be equal to whites. One black township was the SouthWestern Township (Soweto).  Hector

Piete      
rson lived here and he and his
classmates joined the protest against
learning the Afrikaans language in

school.  This was the language that thewhites spoke. Hector and other school
students were being forced to learn

this language but they wanted to learn

their own language, Zulu.  The South
African police beat up the protestors

mercilessly and shot at the crowd.

One of their bullets killed Hector. This

was on 16 June 1976.The African National Congress, a
group of people who led the struggle

against apartheid, and their most well
known leader, Nelson Mandela fought
the apartheid system for several
years.  Finally, they succeeded and in
1994 South Africa became a
democratic country in which people of
all races were considered equal.
Let us now try to understand whata democratic government means to all
of us.PARTICIPATION
Why do we have regular elections?
You've already read in the previous

chapter that people make the
decisions in a democracy. Through

voting in elections people elect leaders
to represent them. These representa-

tives take decisions on behalf of theWhat were Hector and his classmates
protesting about?

List five ways in which the non-whiteswere discriminated against:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.Do you think it is important for all
persons to be treated equally? Why?
  people.  In doing so it is assumed thatthey will keep in mind the voices and
interests of the people.
All governments are elected for fixed
periods. In India this period is five years.Once elected, governments can stay in

power only for that period. If they wantto continue to be in power then they
have to be re-elected by the people. This

is a moment when people can sense
their power in a democracy. In this way
the power of the government gets

limited by regular elections.
Other ways of participatingElections are usually held once in five
years. Besides voting there are other
ways of participating in the process of

government. People participate by

taking an interest in the working of

the government and by criticising it
when required. In August 2005, when

a particular government increased the

money people had to pay for
electricity, people expressed their

disapproval very sharply. They took

out rallies and also organised a
signature campaign. The government

tried to explain and defend its
decision but finally listened to the
people's opinion and withdrew the

increase. The government had to

change its decision because it is
responsible to the people.  
Key Elements of a Democratic Government/ 37What approval or disapproval is
being expressed here?
DiscussLook at some newspapers anddiscuss some elections that you
may have read about.  Why do

you think elections are required
after a fixed period?  Not bad! One of the taps in the nearbyvillage must be getting water!Take Action
It is worrying to know that
the tiger population in India is

falling. Tigers are being
hunted and killed by poachersfor their skins. The

government has not taken the
issue of poaching seriously
enough. It must take actionimmediately, arrest the

poachers and implement the
laws protecting the tiger. If

this does not happen the tiger
will become an extinct animal
in the next ten years.Sohan PalGuwahati, Assam'Government mustgive compensation
to flood victims'Letters to the editor  38/ 
Social and Political LifeThere are many ways in which
people express their views and make
governments understand what
actions they should take. Theseinclude dharnas, rallies, strikes,

signature campaigns etc. Things that

are unfair and unjust are also

brought forward. Newspapers,
magazines and TV also play a role in

discussing government issues and

responsibilities.
While it is true that a democracyallows people to participate, it is alsotrue that not all sections of people are

actually able to do so. Another way for
people to participate is by organising
themselves into social movements
that seek to challenge the government

and its functioning. Members of the
minority community, dalits, adivasis,
women and others are often able to

participate in this manner.
If a country's people are alert and
interested in how the country is run,
the democratic character of thegovernment of that country will be
stronger.
So the next time we see a rallywinding through the streets of our

cities and towns or villages we shouldpause to find out what the rally is
about, who is participating in it, and
what they are protesting about. This

will help to give us a sense of how our
government works.
NEED TO RESOLVE CONFLICT
In Maya's story you read about how
conflicts can often lead to violence
and death because one group decides

that it is all right to use force to

prevent the other group from

protesting.
Conflicts occur when people ofdifferent cultures, religions, regions or
economic backgrounds do not get

along with each other, or when some

among them feel they are being

discriminated against. People may use
violent means to settle their
differences. This leads to fear and

tension among others living in an
area. The government is responsible

for helping to resolve conflicts.
Let's read about some of the
conflicts in our society and the role of

the government in resolving them. 
Read the story again: Do youthink the police shooting of
Hector could have been
avoided?  How?  Religious processions and
celebrations can sometimes lead toconflicts. For example, the route a
procession takes may lead to a conflict.
The government, particularly the 

police, play an important role in 

getting representativesofconcerned

communities to meet and try andarrive at a solution. At times there is

fear that violence may erupt, with
people throwing stones or trying to

disrupt the procession. The police is

responsible for ensuring that violence

does not take place.Rivers too can become a source of
conflict between states. A river may
begin in one state, flow through
another and end in a third. The

sharing of river water between
different states that the river goes
through is becoming an issue of

conflict. For example, you may have
heard about the Cauvery water

dispute between Karnataka and 

Tamil Nadu. The water stored in
Krishnasagar dam in Karnataka is

used for irrigating a number of
districts and for meeting the needs of
the city of Bangalore. The water stored
in Mettur dam in Tamil Nadu is used

for crops grown in the delta region of

that state.A conflict arises because both damsare on the same river. The downstream
dam in Tamil Nadu can only be filled

up if water is released from the

upstream one located in Karnataka.

Therefore, both states can't get as

much water as they need for people in
their states. This leads to conflict. The
central government has to step in and

see that a fair distribution is worked
out for both states.Key Elements of a Democratic Government/ 39The Indian Constitution laysdown the basic rules or laws that
have to be followed by everyone.These laws are for both the
government and the people.

Conflicts and differences have to

be resolved according to these

laws. We will read more about
this in later classes.Quiet flows the Cauvery despite being at the centre of
heated conflict between two states for the last 30 years.  40/ 
Social and Political LifeEQUALITY AND JUSTICEOne of the key ideas of a democraticgovernment is its commitment to
equality and justice. Equality and
justice are inseparable.
The earlier practice of untouch-ability is now banned by law. Thisgroup of people were denied education,

transport or medical facilities and 
even the chance to offer prayers. 

Dr Ambedkar, whom you have read

about earlier in this book, and many
others like him, realised that such

practices must not continue and that
justice can only be achieved when
people are treated equally.
The government also recognises
this and makes special provisions for
groups within society that are unequal.
For instance, in our society there is a
general tendency to value and care for

the boy child more than the girl child. 
This means that society does notvalue the girl and boy child equally andthis is unjust. In this context the
government steps in to promote justice

by providing special provisions that

can enable girls to overcome the

injustice that they are subjected to.
Thus it is possible that fees for girlsmight be waived or lowered in

government schools or colleges.
QUESTIONS1.How would Maya's life be different in South Africa today?
2.What are the various ways in which people participate in the process
of government?
3.Why do you think we need the government to find solutions to many
disputes or conflicts?4.What actions does the government take to ensure that all people are
treated equally? 
5.Read through the chapter and discuss some of the key ideas of a
democratic government. Make a list. For example, all people are
equal.How do you think lowering the schoolfees would help girls attend school?Can you think of any experience from
your life in which you have helped
someone out of a situation which you
thought was unfair?  Did everyone else
see it the same way?  What did youhave to say to convince others that
what you did was fair?DiscussIn Maya's story did the government
support the idea that people are
equal?In Dr Ambedkar's story did thepractice of untouchability supportthe idea that people are equal?
  