Chapter 7UrbanAdministrationne lazy Sunday afternoon Mala

and her friends Shankar, Jehangir
and Rehana were playing a game of
cricket in the street.
Shankar had bowled a good overand although he nearly managed to getRehana out, she was still batting.Frustrated, he bowled a short ball and
hoped she would hit it for an easy catch.
Instead, Rehana hit the ball so hard and

so high that the street light broke.

Rehana screamed, "Oh no, look what

I've done!" Shankar said, "Yes! we forgot
to make a rule that if you break the
street light you are automatically out."
But Mala, Jehangir and Rehana were
more worried about what had happened

and they told Shankar he'd better stopthinking  about the wicket.Last week they had broken Nirmala
Mausi's window and had spent theirpocket money to have it replaced. Would

they have to dish out money again from
their pockets? But  who would they pay
this to? To whom did the lights on the

streets belong? Who changed them? 
Rehana's house was the closest andthey ran and told her mother what hadhappened. Rehana's mother said, "Idon't really know these things in great
A city is much bigger than a village and more spread
out. A city has crowded markets, many buses and

cars, water and electricity facilities, traffic control
and hospitals. Have you ever wondered who is
responsible for running all this? Do you know how

decisions are made? How the planning is done?

Who are the people who do all the work? Read this

chapter and find some answers.O  detail but I do know that it is theMunicipal Corporation of the city that
takes care of replacing lights.  The best
person to ask would be Yasmin Khala.
She just retired from the Municipal

Corporation. Go and ask her, and

Rehana come back home soon."Yasmin Khala lived in the same lane
and she and Rehana's mother were
good friends.  The children ran to

Khala's house and when she opened
the door they began to tell her what
had happened all at once! When they
asked about the street light, Yasmin

Khala laughed and said, "There is no

one person that you can pay the money
to.  There is a big organisation called

the Municipal Corporation that takes
care of street lights, garbage collection,

water supply, keeping the streets and

the market clean." "I've heard about the Municipal
Corporation. They've put up signs
around the city to inform people about

malaria," said Mala.  "Yes,youarequiteright.The
Municipal Corporation  is also
responsible for ensuring that diseases

do not break out in the city. It also runs

schools, hospitals and dispensaries.
And makes gardens and maintains

them," said Yasmin Khala. Then she

added, "Our city Pune is a big city andso here it is called a Municipal
Corporation. In smaller towns it is
called a Municipal Council."  The Ward Councillor and
Administrative Staff
"Yasmin Khala, I'm curious.  Who
decides where a park should go?  Did

you have to make interesting decisions

like this when you worked in theMunicipal Corporation?" asked
Rehana.  "No Rehana, I was working in theaccounts office of the Corporation so I

just worked on pay slips.  Cities are

usually quite large so the Municipal
Corporation has to make a lot of
decisions as well as do a lot of work to
keep the city clean.  The decisions like
where a park or a new hospital should

go are usually made by the Ward

Councillors."  List at least four different tasks
that the Municipality does:1.2.
3.
4.58/ 
Social and Political Life  The city is divided into different
wards and ward councillors get
elected.  The complicated decisions thataffect the entire city are taken by
groups of councillors who form commi-

ttees to decide and debate issues.  For
example, if bus stands need to be
improved, or a crowded market-place
needs to have its garbage cleared more

regularly, or there is a 'nala' or drain

that cuts through the city that needs

cleaning etc.  It is these committees for
water, garbage collection, street lighting

etc. that decide on the work to be done.  When the problems are within a
ward then the people who live in the

ward can contact their councillors.  For

example, if there are dangerous

electrical wires hanging down then the

local Councillor can help them get in
touch with the electricity authority.  While the Councillor's Committeesand the councillors decide on issues,
the Commissioner and the adminis-
trative staff implement these. The

Commissioner and the administrativestaff are appointed. Councillors  are

elected.  "So how are these decisions made?"
asked Rehana who never gave up on
her train of thought.  "Well, all of the Ward Councillors
meet and they make a budget and the
money is spent according to this.  The

Ward Councillors try and ensure that

the particular demands of their wards

are placed before the entire council.

These decisions are then implemented

by the administrative staff," said

Yasmin Khala, enjoying the questions
Fill in the blanks in the sentencesbelow:1.In a panchayat the elected members
are called ___________.
2. The city is divided into several___________.3.In a municipal corporation the elected
members are called ___________.
4.Groups of councillors deal with
issues that affect the ___________ .
5.Elections are held once every
_________ years for the panchayat aswell as for the municipality6.While the councillors make
decisions the administrative 
staff led by the Commissioner

______________ these.How does the MunicipalCorporation get its money?Providing and running so many
services  requires a lot of money.  The
Municipal Corporation collects this in
different ways.  A tax is a sum of

money that people pay to thegovernment for the services the

government provides.  People who

own homes have to pay a property tax

as well as taxes for water and other
services.  The larger the house the
more the tax.  Property taxes however

form only 25-30 per cent of the money
that a Municipal Corporation earns.
There are also taxes for education and
other amenities.  If you own a hotel or
shop then you have to pay a tax for
this as well.  Also the next time you go
to see a movie look carefully at your

ticket because you pay a tax for this as
well. Thus while rich people account
for property taxes, a much wider

population pays more general taxes. 
Urban Administration/ 59  that the children asked.
No adults asked her
about her job and thechildren's questions
provided her an

opportunity to relive some

of her experiences."But the city is solarge.  It must take a lot ofpeople to look after it.
Does the Municipal
Corporation have a lot of
workers?" asked Shankar
curiously.  He had by now
luckily forgotten about the
cricket match and his
incomplete over.  
"Yes, the work in the
city is divided into
different departments.  So

there is the water

department, the garbage collection
department, a department to look after
gardens, another to look after roads.  I

worked on accounts in the sanitation
department," said Yasmin Khala and
then went on to offer the children some

kababs to eat. Jehangir ate his kababs at topspeed and as he wolfed them down he
asked loudly from the kitchen, "Yasmin

Khala where does the garbage that the

Municipal Corporation collects go to?".
The others were still eating when

Yasmin Khala began to answer, "This

question has an interesting answer.  As

you know you can usually find garbage
lying all over the street.  Earlier even

our neighbourhood used to have

garbage lying all over, and if this
remains uncollected it attracts dogs,
rats and flies.  Also, people get ill from

the smell.  At one point things became
so bad that children even stopped

playing cricket in the street because
their parents were afraid that they'd

get sick from staying on the streets too

long." A Community Protest
Yasmin Khala continued, "The women
were very unhappy about the situation

and even came to me for advice.  I said
I could try and speak with some officer

in the department but I wasn't sure

how long it would take.  Then it was
Gangabai who said that it is the Ward

Councillor who we should go to and
protest since we are the ones who
60/ 
Social and Political LifeRecycling is not a new thing. People like the man in the photoabove have been recycling paper, metal, glass and plastic for a

long time. The kabadi wallah plays a major role in recycling
household plastic and paper, including your note books.
  elected him.  She gathered a small
group of women and went to his house.

They began shouting slogans in front of
his house and he came out and askedthem what was wrong.
Gangabai described the situation inthe locality to him.  He promised to go

with them the next day to meet theCommissioner.  He asked Gangabai to

get a petition signed by all of the adults
in the locality saying that garbage was
not being collected.  He suggested that
taking the local sanitation engineer
with them the next day might be a good
idea. The sanitation engineer could also
speak with the Commissioner and tell
him how bad the situation was. That
evening children ran from house to
house making sure that as many

families as possible signed the petition.  The next morning a large group of
women and the Ward Councillor and

the sanitation engineer went to the
Municipal Corporation office.  The

Commissioner met with this large group

and began giving excuses saying that
the Corporation did not have enough
trucks.  But Gangabai smartly replied,

"But you seem to have enough trucks to
collect garbage from the rich localities".  
"That must have left him lost forwords," quipped Jehangir. 
"Yes, he said that he would take
care of it immediately and Gangabai
threatened that if it was not done in

two days a larger group of women

would protest in front of the

Corporation," said Yasmin Khala.  "So
did the streets get cleaned?" asked

Rehana who never let things remain

unfinished.   "Well not within two days and then
after another larger and more noisy
protest the sanitation service in this

locality became more regular." 
"Wow this sounds just like a
Bollywood film with a happy ending,"Urban Administration/ 61What has changed since Khalaretired?  
What Yasmin Khala did not
mention to the children was that in

recent times, in order to save money

the Commissioners of several
municipalities across the country
had hired private contractors to

collect and process garbage. This is

called Sub-Contracting. This means
that the work that was earlier being
done by government workers is now

being done by a private company.  These contract workers get paid lessand their jobs are temporary.

Collecting garbage is also quite a
dangerous job and often these

contract workers do not have any
access to safety measures and are

not taken care of if they are injured

while working.What was Gangabai protesting
about?Why do you think Gangabaidecided to approach the Ward
Councillor?  What did Gangabai say whenthe Commissioner said that
there were not enough trucks in

the city?    

The city of Surat had a plague scare in 1994. Surat was one of the dirtiest
cities in India. Houses, hotels and restaurants would dump their garbage

into the nearest drain or street which made it very difficult for sweepers

to collect and transfer the garbage into selected dumps. In addition to this,
the Municipal Corporation did not collect the garbage as often as it shouldhave and this led to the situation getting worse. Plague spreads through

the air and people who have the disease have to be isolated. In Surat,
several people lost their lives, and over 300,000 deserted the city. The
scare of the plague ensured that the Municipal Corporation completely

cleaned up the city. To this date, Surat continues to remain the second

cleanest city in India after Chandigarh.
Do you know when and how often garbage gets collected in yourneighbourhood? Do you think it is the same for all neighbourhoods of the

city? Why not? Discuss.Did you know that your taxes enable the government to provide roads,
bridges, parks, and street lights? List three more benefits that the taxes

help in funding, after discussing with your family:1.
2.
3.62/ 
Social and Political Lifesaid Mala who already began
imagining herself in the lead role of

Gangabai.The children enjoyed hearing
Gangabai'sstory immensely.  They
had sensedthat Gangabai was much

loved andrespected and now they
understood why. They got up andthanked Khala for answering their
questions and then, before they left,
Rehana said,"Oh, I have one last
question Khala. The two dustbins thatwe have at homenow, are they also
Gangabai's idea?"Khala began laughing. "No, notreally.  The Municipal Corporation was
the one who suggested that we do thisto help keep our streets clean. When we
sort our own garbage it reduces their

work."The children thanked Khala
and walked back down the street
together. It had become quite late

and they needed to get back home.
For some reason the street seemed

darker than usual.  They looked
up and then looked at each other
smiling and ran right back to
Khala's house–  Urban Administration/ 63Photo 1QUESTIONS1.Why did the children go to Yasmin Khala's house?
2.List four ways in which the work of the Municipal Corporation
affects the life of a city-dweller.
3.Who is a Municipal Councillor?
4.What did Gangabai do and why?

5.How does the Municipal Corporation earn the money to do its
work?  64/ 
Social and Political Life6.DiscussIn the two photographs you see different ways of collecting and
disposing garbage.i)  Which way do you think provides safety to the person disposing
garbage?ii)  What are the dangers of collecting garbage in the manner shown in
the first photograph?iii)  Why do you think that proper ways of disposing garbage are not
available to those who work in municipalities?Photo 27.Several poor people in the city work as domestic servants as well as
work for the Corporation, keeping the city clean. Yet the slums in
which they live are quite filthy. This is because these slums seldom
have any water and sanitation facilities. The reason often given by
the Municipal Corporation is that the land in which the poor have
set up their homes does not belong to them and that slum-dwellers
do not pay taxes. However people living in middle class
neighbourhoods pay very little in taxes compared to the amount of
money the corporation spends on them in setting up parks, street

lighting facilities, regular garbage collection etc. Also as you read in

this chapter, the property taxes collected by the Municipality makes

up only 25-30 per cent of its money. Why do you think it is
important that the Corporation should spend more money on slum

localities? Why is it important that the Municipal Corporationprovide the poor in the city with the same facilities that the rich get?
  