Chapter 3What isGovernment?
very country needs a government

to make decisions and get thingsdone.  These can be decisions aboutwhere to build roads and schools, or
how to reduce the price of onions

when they get too expensive or ways
to increase the supply of electricity.

The government also takes action on
many social issues, for example it has
several programmes to help the poor.

It does other important things such as
running postal and railway services.You must have heard the word 'government'
mentioned several times.  In this chapter you
will learn about what a government is and the
important role it plays in our lives. What do
governments do? How do they decide what to

do? What is the difference between different

types of governments such as monarchies and

democracies? Read more and find out–. 
Look at the newspaper headlines aboveand list the different kinds of activities

that the government is reported to be
doing in these newspaper headlines.1.
2.
3.
4.
Isn't this a wide range of activities?  
What do you think government is?
Discuss in class.E  The government also has the job of
protecting the boundaries of the
country and maintaining peacefulrelations with other countries.  It is
responsible for ensuring that all its

citizens have enough to eat and have
good health facilities. When there are

natural disasters like the tsunami oran earthquake it is the government

that mainly organises aid and
assistance for the affected people. If

there is a dispute or if someone has

committed a crime you find people in
a court. Courts are also part of the
government.
Perhaps you are wondering how
governments manage to do all this.
And why it is necessary for them to do
so. When human beings live and work
together, there needs to be some

amount of organisation so that
decisions can be made.Some rules have to be made thatapply to everyone. For example, there

is a need to control resources and

protect the territory of a country, so

people can feel secure.  Governments

do this on behalf of their people by
exercising leadership, taking

decisions and implementing these
among all the people living in their
territory.Levels of Government

Now that you know that thegovernment is responsible for so
Can you list three things that
the government does which

have not been mentioned.1.2.
3.Some examples ofinstitutions that are

part of the government:
The Supreme Court,
The Indian Railways
and Bharat Petroleum.
28/ 
Social and Political Life  many different things, can you think
of how it manages to do all this? The
government works at different levels:
at the local level, at the level of thestate and at the national level. The
local level means in your village, town
or locality, the state level would mean
that which covers an entire state like
Haryana or Assam and the nationallevel relates to the entire country.

Later in this book, you will read about
how local level government functions,
and when you go into the next few
classes you will learn about how

governments function at the state and

central levels.What is Government?/ 29DelhiNational levelState level  30/ 
Social and Political LifeDistrict levelThe decision of the Indian government to maintain
peaceful relations with Russia.
The decision of the West Bengal Government on

whether to have Board exam in Class 8 for all

government schools.
Introduction of two new train connections between

Jammu and Bhubaneswar.
The decision to locate a common well in a
particular area of the village.
Decision to construct a big children's park in

Patna.The decision of the Haryana government to provide

free electricity for all farmers.
Introduction of a new 1000 rupee note.
Exercise:
Look at the statements in the column on the left. Canyou identify which level they belong to? Place tick marks againstthe level you consider most appropriate.
LocalStateCentral  What is Government?/ 31Laws and the Government
The government makes laws and
everyone who lives in the country hasto follow these. This is the only way
governments can function. Just like

the government has the power to

make decisions, similarly it has thepower to enforce its decisions.  For

example, there is a  law that says that

all persons driving a motor vehicle
must have a licence. Any person
caught driving a vehicle without a
licence can either be jailed or fined a
large sum of money.  Without these

laws the government's power to make

decisions is not of much use.In addition to any actions thatgovernments can take, there are also

steps that people can take if they feel
that a particular law is not being
followed. If a person feels, forexample, that they were not hired for

a job because of their religion or caste,

he or she may approach the court and

claim that the law is not being
followed. The court can then give
orders about what should be done.
Types of Government
Who gives the government this power
to make decisions and enforce laws? 
The answer to this questiondepends on the type of government

there is in a country.  In a democracy
it is the people who give thegovernment this power.  They do this

through elections in which they vote
for particular persons and elect them.Once elected, these persons form the

government.  In a democracy the

government has to explain its actions

and defend its decisions to the people.  Another form of government is
monarchy.  The monarch (king or
queen) has the power to make
decisions and run the government.

The monarch may have a small group
of people to discuss matters with, butthe final decision-making power
remains with the monarch. Unlike in

a democracy, kings and queens do not
have to explain their actions or defend
the decisions they take.DiscussThink of an example of anotherlaw. Why do you think it isimportant that people abide bythis law?  32/ 
Social and Political LifeDemocratic Governments
India is a democracy. Thisachievement is the result of a long

and eventful struggle of the Indian
people. There are other places in the
world where people have also
struggled to have democracies. You

now know that the main feature of a

democracy is that the people have the
power to elect their leaders. Soina

senseademocracyisruleby the

people.Thebasicideaisthat people

rulethemselvesby participating in the

making of these rules.Democratic governments in our
times are usually referred to as
representative democracies. In

representative democracies people 

do not participate directly but,

instead, choose their representatives 

through an election process. These

representatives meet and make
Discuss1. Do you think it is important for peopleto be involved in decisions that affect
them?  Give two reasons for your answer.

2. Which type of government would

you prefer to have in the place you live

in?  Why?
3. Which of the statements below iscorrect?  Correct those sentences that

you think need correction.
a. In a monarchy the country's
citizens are allowed to elect whomever

they want.b. In a democracy a king hasabsolute powers to rule the country.c.   In a monarchy people can raise
questions about the decisions themonarch takes.
Nowhere in the
world have gover-
nments willinglyshared power.
All over Europe
and USA,women andthe poor havehad to fight forparticipationin government.
Women's
struggle to votegot strengthened
during the First World
War.  This movement is called the
women's suffrage movement as

the term suffrage usually means

right to vote.During the War, many men were
away fighting, and because of this
women were called upon to do

work that was earlier considered

men's work.  Many women began
organising and managing
different kinds of work. When

people saw this they began to
wonder why they had created so

many unfair stereotypes about

women and what they were
capable of doing. So women
began to be seen as being equally
capable of making decisions.The suffragettes demanded the
right to vote for all women and to
get their demands heard they

chained themselves to railings in
public places.  Many suffragettes

were imprisoned and went on

hunger strikes,and they had to be
fed by force.  American women got

the right to vote in 1920 while
women in the UK got to vote on
the same terms as men some

years later, in 1928.
  What is Government?/ 33decisions for the entire population.
These days a government cannot call

itself democratic unless it allows what
is known as universal adult franchise.
This means that all adults in thecountry are allowed to vote.  
But it was not always like this.Can you believe that there was a time

when governments did not allow

women and the poor to participate in
elections? In their earliest forms

governments allowed only men who

owned property and were educated, to

vote. This meant that women, the
poor, the property-less and the
uneducated were not allowed to vote.

The country was governed by the

rules and regulations that these few

men made!In India, before Independence, only
a small minority was allowed to voteand they therefore came together to

determine the fate of the majority.

Several people including Gandhijiwere shocked at the unfairness of this

practice and demanded that all adults
have the right to vote. This is known
as universal adult franchise.Writing in the journal 
Young India
in 1931, Gandhiji said, "I cannot
possibly bear the idea that a man who
has got wealth should get the vote but
a man who has got character but no
wealth or literacy should have no vote,or that a man who honestly works by
the sweat of his brow day in and day

out should not have the vote for the
crime of being a poor man–".Voting in a rural area: A mark is put on the finger to
make sure that a person casts only one vote.
  34/ 
Social and Political LifeQUESTIONS1.What do you understand by the word 'government'?  List five ways in
which you think the government affects your daily life.
2.Why do you think the government needs to make rules for everyone
in the form of laws?
3.Name two essential features of a democratic government.
4.What was the suffrage movement?  What did it accomplish?

5.Gandhiji strongly believed that every adult in India should be given
the right to vote. However, a few people don't share his views. They
feel that illiterate people, who are mainly poor, should not be given

the right to vote.  What do you think?  Do you think this would be a
form of discrimination?  Give five points to support your view and

share these with the class.
  