Chapter 91.What do you see in
this illustration?2. You have already
read about the work

that people do in rural
areas.  Now compare

the work that people in
this illustration are
doing with the work
that people do in rural
areas. 
3.Some parts of the
city are different from
others. What differences
do you notice in this
illustration?UrbanLivelihoods  Urban Livelihoods/ 77Working on the Street
his is the city where my cousin
lives.  I've been here only a few
times.  It is very big. Once, when I camehere, my cousin took me around. We

left the house early in the morning. As
we turned the corner onto the main
street we saw that it was already

buzzing with activity. The vegetablevendor was busy arranging tomatoes,carrots and cucumbers in baskets at

her stall so that people could see whatTThere are more than five thousand towns and twenty seven big cities in
India. Big cities like Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata etc. have more

than a million people living and working here. They say that 'the city

never sleeps!' Let's visit one and find out about the work people do in
the city. Are they employed by someone or are they self-employed? How

do they organise themselves? And do they have similar employment
and earning opportunities?
  78/ 
Social and Political LifeBachchu Manjhi Œ A Cycle-RickshawPullerI come from a village in Bihar where I
worked as amason. My wife  and three
children live in the village. We don't own
land. In the village I did not get masonrywork regularly.The income that I earned
was not enough for our family. After I reached this city, I bought an old
cycle rickshaw and paid for it in
instalments. This was many years ago. I come to the bus stop every morning and
take the customers wherever they want to
go.  I work till 8.30 in the evening. I takerides of up to 6 kilometres in the
surrounding area. Each customer gives

me Rs. 5-10 per trip depending on thedistance. When I'm ill I can't do this work,so on those days I don't earn anything. 
I stay with my friends in a rented room.
They work in a nearby factory. I earn

between Rs. 80-100 every day, out ofwhich I spend Rs. 50-60 on food and rent.

The rest I save for my family. I visit my

village two or three times a year to see my

family. Though my family survives on the
money I send, my wife also earns from
agriculturalworkthatshegetsoncein
a while.she had to sell. Next to her stall was alovely, colourful one that sold all kinds

of flowers.We bought a red rose and a yellow
rose. On the pavement opposite we
saw a person selling newspapers with
a small crowd of people around him.
Everyone wanted to read the news!

Buses whizzed past and there

were auto-rickshaws filled

with school-children. Nearby,

under a tree, a cobbler sat

taking his tools and materials
out of a small tin box. Next to
him the roadside barber had

begun his work: he already

had a customer who wanted
an early-morning shave!
A little way down theroad, a woman was pushing

along a cart with all kinds of
plastic bottles, boxes,
hairpins, clips etc. in it whileanother person on a cycle trolley was
carrying vegetables to sell to people in
their houses.We came to a place where
rickshaws were standing in a row
waiting for customers. We decided to

take one to the market, which wasabout two kilometres down the road.
  Urban Livelihoods/ 79Like Bachchu Manjhi a largenumber of people in the city work onthe streets. In a survey of Ahmedabad
city it was found that 12 per cent of allthe workers in the
city were people

working on the street.

They sometimes sellthings or repair them

or provide a service.
They work on theirown. They are not
employed by anyoneand thereforehave to

organise their own
work. They haveto

plan how much to
purchase, as well as

whereand how to set

up their shops. Their
shops areusually

temporary structures:

sometimesjust some

boardsor papers

spreadover discarded

boxes ormaybe a

canvas sheet hung upon a few poles. They may also usetheir own carts or simply a plastic
sheet spread on the pavement.  They

can be asked to dismantle their shops
at any time by the police. They have nosecurity. There are certain parts of the

city where these hawkers are not

allowed to enter.
Vendors sell things that are often
prepared at home by their families
who purchase, clean, sort and make

them ready to sell.  For example, those

who sell food or snacks on the street,
prepare most of these at home. 
1. Why did Bachchu Manjhi come tothe city? 2. Why can't Bachchu Manjhi livewith his family?3. Talk to a vegetable vendor or
hawker and find out how do they
organise their work, their way ofpreparing, purchasing, selling etc.
4. Bachchu Manjhi has to thinktwice before taking a day off from

work. Why?Often workers who make a living in the city are forced to set up their
homes on the street as well. Below is a space where several workers

leave their belongings during the day and cook their meals at night.  There are almost one crore 'street
vendors' in the country working inurban areas. Street vending was till
recently looked upon only as an
obstruction to traffic and to people

walking. However with the effort of many

organisations it is now recognised as a

general benefit and as a right of people toearn their livelihood. The government is

thinking about modifying the law that
banned street vendors, so that they have

a place to work and that there is also a

free flow of traffic and people. Hawking

zones have been suggested for townsand cities. It has also been suggestedthat mobile vendors should be allowed to
move around freely.  Hawkers need to be

part of committees that are set up to

take these and other decisions relating

to them.In the Market
When we reached the market the shops
were just beginning to open. But the

place was already crowded because of

the festival season. There were rows

and rows of shops selling sweets, toys,

clothes, footwear, utensils, electronic
goods, etc. There was a dentist's clinic

also at one end. My cousin had an appointment withthe dentist. We went there first so that

we would not miss our turn. We had to

wait for a while in a room before she

was called inside. The dentist
examined her and asked her to come
back the following day to get a cavity in
her tooth filled.  My cousin was scared

because she thought the process would

be painful and was upset that she had
allowed her teeth to go bad.From the dental clinic she took me to
a new garment showroom because I
wanted to buy some readymade

clothes. The showroom had three-

floors. Each floor had different types of

clothes. We went to the third floor

where clothes for girls were kept.  
Harpreet and Vandana:
BusinesspersonsMy father and uncle worked in a smallshop. During festival times and on
Sundays my mother and I helped them
in the shop. I started working there
only after I completed my college.
(Harpreet)
We opened this showroom some
years ago. I'm a dress designer. Our

business has changed. These days
people prefer to buy readymade

clothes, rather than have them stitched.
The trend these days is for readymade

garments. You also need an attractive

display for them. (Vandana)
For our showroom, we buy things
from different places. We buy most of
80/ 
Social and Political Life  the materials from Mumbai, Ahmeda-
bad, Ludhiana and Tripura. Some

materials also come from Noida and
Gurgaon, towns near Delhi. We get
some dress items from foreign

countries, too.There are several things we need to
do to run this showroom properly.  We
advertise in various newspapers,
cinema theatres, television and radio

channels. Currently, this building is

rented but soon, we plan to buy it. Ever

since this market has become the main
market for people living in the
surrounding apartments our business

has grown. We've been able to buy a

car and book a flat in an apartment
complex nearby.Like Harpreet and Vandana there
are many people who own shops in
various markets of the city. These
shops may be small or large and they
sell different things. Most business-

persons manage their own shops or
business. They are not employed by

anyone. But, they do employ a
number of other workers as
supervisors and helpers. These are

permanent shops that are given a
licence to do business by themunicipal corporation. The Municipal
Corporation also decides on which dayof the week the market has to remain
closed. For example the shops in the
above market are closed on

Wednesdays. This market also has

small offices and shops that provide
services, such as banks, courier
services and others.In the Factory-Workshop Area

I wanted to have zari work done on oneof my dresses which I needed for a
special occasion. My cousin said thatshe knew Nirmala who works in a

garment factory. Nirmala's neighbours

do zari work and embroidery. So we

caught a bus and headed towards the

factory area. The bus was really

crowded. At every stop more and more

people got on and hardly anyone

seemed to get off. People were pushing

others  to make more space for

themselves. My cousin guided me to a
corner so that we wouldn't get

squashed. I wondered how people

travel like this every day. As the busentered the factory area people started

getting off. We also got off soon at a

crossing. What a relief that was!
There were a large number of people
sitting on railings or in groups at the

crossing. They seemed to be waiting for

someone. Some groups had people on

scooters standing by and talking with
them. My cousin explained that this
place was called "labour chowk". These
were daily wage labourers who work

as helpers to masons. They dig at
construction sites, lift loads or unloadWhy did Harpreet and Vandana
start a showroom?  What do they

have to do to run the showroom?
Talk to a shop owner in a market
and find out how he plans his work.
Have there been any changes in his

business in the past twenty years?What are the differences between
those who sell on the street and

those in the market?Urban Livelihoods/ 81  82/ 
Social and Political Lifetrucks in the market, dig pipelines andtelephone cables and also build roads.

There are thousands of such casual
workers in the city.We entered the factory area to find it
full of small workshops. There seemed
to be endless rows of them. In one
section we saw people working in a
small room on sewing

machines where cloth was

being stitched. One person
operated one sewing
machine. Clothes that hadbeen stitched were stacked
on one side of the room.
We located Nirmala in
the stitching unit. She was
happy to meet my cousin
and promised to get zari

work done on my dress.
Nirmala works as a
tailor in an export garment

unit. The factory where

she works makes summerclothes for people in foreign

countries like U.S.A., U.K.,
Germany and the Netherlands.

Workers like Nirmala have to

work very long hours in the
months from December to

April.   A normal working day

begins at 9 a.m. and finishes
only by 10 p.m., sometimes
even later. She works for six
days a week. At times when
the work needs to  be done
urgently, she works on
Sundays, too. Nirmala is paid

Rs 80 a day for eight hoursand Rs 40 extra for workinglate. By June the work is  overand the factory reduces its staff.

Nirmala will also be asked to leave. For
about three or four months in the year,

there is no work for her.
Most workers, like Nirmala, are
employed on what is known as casualbasis i.e. they are required to 
At labour chowk, daily wage workers wait with their toolsfor people to come and take them for work.  Urban Livelihoods/ 83come as and when theemployer needs them.
They are employed when
the employer gets largeorders or during certain

seasons. At other times
of the year they have to
find some other work.Jobs like Nirmala's are
not permanent. If workers
complain about their pay
or working conditions
they are asked to leave.
There is no job security or
protection if there is ill

treatment. They are also

expected to work very long hours.
For example in the cloth mill units
the workers work on day and night
shifts, with each shift lasting 12
hours. One worker works on one
machine for 12 hours and then is
replaced by another on the same

machine for the next 12 hours.Working in Call Centres is a new form of employment in
the big cities.ACallCentreisacentralisedofficethat

deals with problems and questions that consumers/
customershaveregardinggoodspurchasedandservices
likebanking,ticketbooking,etc.CallCentresare

generally set up as large rooms with work stations that

include a computer, a telephone set and supervisor's

stations. India has become a major centre not only for
Indian companies but also foreign companies. They set

up Call Centres here as they can get people who can

speak English and will work for lower wages.1. Why do you think smallworkshops and factories
employ casual workers?2.Describe the working
conditions of people like
Nirmala keeping in mind the

following: working hours,
conditions in the workplace,earnings, and the days of

work available. 3.Would you say that
domestic workers like
housemaids are also casual
workers? Why? Describe theworkday of one such woman
detailing the work she does
in other peoples' houses.In the office area
My aunt, Sudha worksas a Marketing
Manager.She had asked us to reach her office
before 5.30 p.m. We thought we'd get late so
we took an autorickshaw that managedto get
us therejust in time. Her office was in an area
surrounded by tall buildings. There were
hundreds of peoplecoming out. Some headed
for the car park while others went towards
the row of buses. 
My aunt is a marketing manager in acompany which manufactures biscuits.The
factory where the biscuits are made is
outside the city. She supervises the work of
50 salespersons who travel to different parts
  84/ 
Social and Political Lifeof the city. They get orders from
shopkeepers and collect payments from

them. She has divided the city into sixregions and once a week she meets the
salespersons of each region. She

checks their progress report and

discusses problems they face. She has

to plan the sales in the entire city and
often has to work late and travel to
different places
.She gets a regular salary every
month and is a permanent worker with

the company. She can expect her job to
continueforalongperiodoftime.Being
a permanent worker she also gets
other benefits such as the following:Savings for old age: A part of hersalary is kept in a fund with the
government. She will earn interest on

these savings. When she retires from

this job she will get this money and
she can then live on that.Holidays:She gets off on Sundays
and national holidays. She also gets
some days as annual leave. Medical facilities for her family: Hercompanypaysthemedicalexpensesup
toacertainamountforherandher
family members. She gets medicalleave if she falls ill and her salary is
not cut if she takes this leave.There are many workers in the city
who work in offices, factories, and
government departments where they

are employed as regular and

permanent workers.
They attend the same office or
factory regularly. Their work is clearly

identified. They get a regular salary.

Unlike casual workers they will not be
asked to leave if the factory does not
have much work.At the end of the day we got into myaunt's car, exhausted. But it had been

so much fun! And I thought, how
interesting that so many people do so

many different things in the city.

They've probably never met each other

but it is their work that ties them
together and helps to make up city life.QUESTIONS1.Read and discuss the following description of the living conditions of
workers who come to the labour chowk. Most workers that we find at the labour chowk cannot afford permanent
accommodation and so sleep on pavements near the chowk, or they pay
Rs 6 a night for a bed at a nearby night shelter run by the Municipal
Corporation. To compensate for the lack of security, local tea and

cigarette shops function as banks, moneylenders and safety lockers, all

rolled into one. Most workers leave their tools at these shops for the night
for safekeeping, and pass on any extra money to them. The shopkeepers
keepthemoneysafelyandalsoofferloanstolabourersin need.
Source: Aman Sethi, Hindu On-line
  Urban Livelihoods/ 853.In what ways is a permanent and regular job different from a casual
job? Discuss.4.What benefits does Sudha get along with her salary?
5.Fill in the following table to show the services provided by people in
the markets which you visit frequently.
2.Complete the following table and discuss how their work is different:
Nature of the service provided
Name of the shop or office
Name Place ofworkEarnings
Security ofworkBenefitsreceived
Work on
their own oremployedBachchuManjhi Rs 100 a dayHarpreet,
Vandana
Work on their
own Nirmala
No securitySudhaCompanyRs 30,000 p.m.  