Chapter 8RuralLivelihoodsIn the first chapter we looked at the many kinds of
diversity in our lives. We also explored how living in

different regions has an effect on the work people do,
the kinds of plants, trees, crops or things that become
important to them. In this chapter we will look at the
different ways in which people earn their living in

villages. And here too, as in the first two chapters,

we will examine whether people have equalopportunities to earn a living. We will look at the

similarities in their life situations and the problems

that they face.1. Describe the work that you see people doing in the abovepictures. 
2. Identify the different types of work that are related to farming
and those that are not. List these in a table.
3. In your notebook draw some pictures of work that you have
seen people do in rural areas and write a few sentences that

describe the work.  Kalpattu villagealpattu is a village that's close tothe sea coast in Tamil Nadu.
People here do many kinds of work.
As in other villages, here too there is

non-farm work such as making

baskets, utensils, pots, bricks,bullock-carts etc.There are people who provide
services such as blacksmiths, nurses,
teachers, washermen, weavers,

barbers, cycle repair mechanics and

so on. There are also some

shopkeepers and traders.  In the main
street, which looks like a bazaar, you
will find a variety of small shops suchas tea shops, grocery shops, barber

shops, a cloth shop, a tailor and two
fertiliser and seed shops. There are

four teashops, which sell tiffin Œ such

as idli, dosai and upama in themorning and snacks like vadai, bonda
and mysorepak in the evening.  Near

the teashops in a corner lives a
blacksmith family whose home servesas their workshop.  Next to their home
is a cycle hire and repair shop.  Two

families earn a living by washing

clothes. There are some people who go
to the nearby town to work as
construction workers and lorry
drivers.  The village is surrounded by low
hills. Paddy is the main crop that is
grown in irrigated lands. Most of the
families earn a living through

agriculture.
There are some
coconutgroves around.

Cotton, sugar cane and
plantain are also

grown, and there are

mango orchards. Let

us now meet some
people who work in the
fields in Kalpattu and
see what we can learn

about farming from
them.ThulasiAll of us here work on
Ramalingam's land. 
He has twenty acres 

of paddy fields inKalpattu. Even before I was married I

used to work on paddy fields in my
parental village.  I work from 8.30 in

the morning till 4.30 in the evening and

Karuthamma, Ramalingam's wife,
supervises us. 68/ 
Social and Political LifeKTransplanting paddy is back-breaking work.
  Rural Livelihoods/ 69Based on the above diagram wouldyou say that Thulasi earns money

throughout the year?
This is one of the few times in theyear that I find regular work.  Now I
am transplanting the paddy, when theplants have grown a bit Ramalingam
will call us again for weeding and then
finally once again for the harvesting.When I was young I could do thiswork with no difficulty. But now as I
grow older I find bending for long

hours with my feet in water very
painful.  Ramalingam pays Rs 40 per
day. This is a little less than what
labourers get in my home village, but I

come here because I can depend on

him to call me whenever there is work.

Unlike others, he does not go looking
for cheaper labour from other villages.
My husband, Raman is also alabourer. We don't own any land.

During this time of the year he sprays
pesticides. When there is no work on
the farm he finds work outside, either
loading sand from the river or stone

from the quarry nearby. This is sent by
truck to be used in nearby towns tomake houses.Apart from working on the land, I do
all the tasks at home. I cook food for my
family, clean the house and washclothes. I go with other women to the
nearby forest to collect firewood.  About

one kilometre away we have a village

borewell from where I fetch water. My

husband helps in getting materials
such as groceries for the house.
Our school-going daughters are the
joy of our lives. Last year, one of them

fell ill and had to be taken to the
hospital in town. We had to sell our

cow to pay back the money we
borrowed from Ramalingam for her

treatment.
1.Describe the work that
Thulasi does. How is itdifferent from the work
Raman does?2.Thulasi gets paid very little
money for the work shedoes. Why do you think
agricultural labourers like
her are forced to accept low

wages?3.In what ways would her way
of earning a living have

been different if Thulasi

owned some farm land?

Discuss.4.What are the crops grown in
your region or nearby 

rural area? What kinds 

of work do agricultural
labourers do?
JanuaryFebruaryMarch
AprilMayJuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctoberNovemberDecemberPreparing
saplingsTransplanting
Weeding
Harvesting  SekarWe have to carry this paddy to our
house. My family has just finishedharvesting our field. We don't own
much land, only two acres. We manage

to do all the work on our own.  At
times, especially during the harvest I
take the help of other small farmers

and in turn help them harvest their

field. The trader gave me seeds andfertilisers as a loan. To pay back this

loan I have to sell my paddy to him at
a somewhat lower price than what I
would get in the market. He has sent
his agent to remind farmers who have

taken loans that they will sell the
paddy only to him.I will probably get 60 bags of paddy
from my field. Some of this I will sell to
settle the loan. The rest will be used in

my home. But whatever I have will last
only  eight months. So I need to earn

some money. I work in Ramalingam'srice mill.  Here I help him collect paddy

from other farmers in the neighbouring

villages.We also have a hybrid cow, whose
milk we sell in the local milkcooperative.Thiswaywegetalittle
extramoneyforoureverydayneeds.
On being in Debt Asyou'vereadabove,veryoften
farmerslikeSekar need to borrow

money to purchasebasic things like
seeds, fertilisers andpesticides. Often
they borrow this money from
moneylenders. If the seeds are not of

good quality or pests attack their crop

there can be a major crop failure.
70/ 
Social and Political LifeAs you saw in Thulasi's story poorfamilies in rural areas often spend a
lot of time every day collectingfirewood, getting water and grazing
their cattle.Even though they do not earn any
money from these activities they have

to do them for the household.  Thefamily needs to spend time doing this
as they are not able to survive on the

little money they earn.
Nearly two-fifth of all rural familiesare agricultural labourers in our

country.  There are some who have

small plots of land while others like
Thulasi are landless.
Not being able to earn money
throughout the year forces people in

many rural areas to travel long

distances in search of work. This

travel, or migration, takes place
during particular seasons.  Rural Livelihoods/ 71The crops can also be ruined
if the monsoon does not bringenough rain. When this happensfarmers sometimes are unable
to pay back their loans.  And, for
the family to survive, they may
even have to borrow more

money.  Soon the loan becomesso large that no matter what
they earn, they are unable 

to repay.
This is when we can say theyare caught in debt. In recent
years this has become a majorcause of distress among farmers.

In some areas this has also

resulted in many farmers

committing suicide.Ramalingam and KaruthammaIn addition to land, Ramalingam™sfamily owns a rice mill and a shop
selling seeds, pesticides etc.  For the
rice mill they used some of their own
money and also borrowed from the

government bank.  They buy paddy

from within the village and from

surrounding villages. The rice that is

produced in the mill is sold to traders
in nearby towns. This gives them a
substantial income.1. What work does Sekar™s familydo? Why do you think Sekar does
not usually employ labourers for
doing farming work?
2. Why does Sekar not go to thetown market to get a better price for
his paddy?3. Sekar™s sister Mina had alsotaken a loan from the trader. She

does not want to sell her paddy to
him but she will pay back her loan.
Write an imaginary conversation

between Mina and the trader'sagent and the arguments given byeach person.4. What are the similarities and
differences between Sekar™s and

Thulasi™s lives? Your answer could

be based on the land that they
have, their need to work on the land
that belongs to others, or loans that
they need and their earnings. 
Read again Sekar™s and Thulasi™saccounts. What do they say about
Ramalingam, the large farmer?
Together with what you have read
fill in the details below:1. How much land does he have?
2. What does Ramalingam do withthe paddy grown on his land?
3. Apart from  farming how else does
he earn?
Transplanted paddy growing in a few of
Ramalingam™s 20 acres. A result of hard labour

performed by agricultural workers like Thulasi.
  Agricultural Labourers and Farmers
in IndiaIn Kalpattu village there are
agricultural labourers like Thulasi,

and many small farmers like Sekar,

and a few big farmers like

Ramalingam.  In India nearly two outof every five rural families are

agricultural labourer families. All of

them depend on the work they do on
other people's fields to earn a living.

Many of them are landless and others

may own very small plots of land.In the case of small farmers like
Sekhar their land is barely enough to

meet their needs.  In India 80 per centof farmers belongto this group. Only
20 per cent of India's farmers are like
Ramalingam. These large farmers

cultivate most of the land in the
villages. A large part of their produce is

sold in the market. Many of them have
started other businesses such as
shops, moneylending, trading, small
factories etc.We have looked at farming in
Kalpattu. Apart from farming, many
people in rural areas depend upon

collection from the forest, animal

husbandry, dairy produce, fishing etc.

For example, in some villages inFrom the figures given above
would you say that a majority of
the country's farmers are quite
poor?  What do you think can bedone to change this situation?Terrace Farming in Nagaland
This is a village called Chizamiwhich is in Phek district inNagaland. The people of this
village belong to the Chakhesang
community. They do 'terrace'
cultivation.This means that the land on a hillslope is made into flat plots and
carved out in steps. The sides of
each plot are raised in order to

retain water. This allows water to

stand in the field, which is bestfor rice cultivation.The people of Chizami have theirown individual fields. But, they
also work collectively in each
other's fields. They form  groups

of six or eight and take an entire

mountainside to clean the  weeds
on it.Each group eats together once
their work for the day is over. This

goes on for several days until the
work is completed.72/ 
Social and Political Life  central India, both farming
and collection from the

forest are important
sources of livelihood.
Collecting mahua, tendu
leaves, honey, to be sold to
traders, is an important
source of additional
income.Similarly selling milk tothe village cooperative
society or taking milk to the
nearby town may be themain source of livelihood for
some families.  In the
coastal areas, we find fishing villages.

Let us find out more about the lives of

a fishing family by reading about Aruna

and Paarivelan who live in Pudupet, a
village close to Kalpattu.Aruna and PaarivelanNot very far from Kalpattu is the
village of Pudupet.  People here earn

their living by fishing. Their houses
are close to the sea and one finds rows
of catamarans and nets lyingaround. At about 7 o
™clockin the morning there is a
lot of activity on the beach.This is the time when thecatamarans return with

their catch and women
gather to buy and sell fish. My husband Paarivelan,my brother and my brother-
in-law returnedlate today.

I was very worried. They
go to the sea together in
our catamaran. They saidthey were caught in a
storm. I have kept aside

some fish for the family. IFisher-woman selling the catch at the local market.
Rural Livelihoods/ 73  will auction the rest. The money I get
from the auction will be divided into

four shares. One each for each person
who went fishing and the fourth one isfor the equipment. Since we own the
catamaran, engine and nets, we get
that share too. We have taken a loan

from a bank and purchased an engine,
which is fixed on to the catamaran.
Now they can go far into the sea so
that they can get a better catch.The women who buy fish here will
carry them in baskets to be sold innearby villages. Then there are others
like traders who buy for the shops in
the town. I'll only finish this auction by
noon. In the evening my husband and
our relatives will untangle and repair

our nets. Early tomorrow morning

around 2 a.m. they will set out to sea

again. Every year, for at least about

four months during the monsoon, they
cannot go to the sea because this is
when the fish breed. During these

months we survive by borrowing from

the trader. Because of this, later on we

are forced to sell the fish to that trader,
and cannot do our auction. Those lean
months are the most difficult. Last year

we suffered a lot because of the

tsunami.Rural Livelihoods
People in rural areas earn their living
in various ways. Some work on farms

while others earn their living on non-

farm activities. Working on farms

involves operations such as preparing

the land, sowing, weeding andharvesting of crops. We depend on
nature for the growth of these crops.

Hence life revolves around certain

seasons. People are busy during

sowing and harvesting and less so at
other times. Rural people in different

regions of the country grow different

crops. However, we do find similarities

in their life situations and in the
problems that they face. 
How people are able to survive or
earn will depend upon the land that

they cultivate. Many depend on these
lands for work as labourers. Most

farmers grow crops both for their own

requirements and also to sell in the

market. Some have to sell to tradersfrom whom they have borrowed

money. For their survival, many
families need to borrow money for

their work or when no work is
available. There are some families in

rural areas which thrive on large acres

of lands, business and other activities.
However, most small farmers,

agricultural labourers, fishing

families, crafts persons in the villages
do not find enough work to keep them
employed throughout the year.
74/ 
Social and Political Life1. Why do both Sekar's andAruna's families have to borrow?

What similarities and differences
do you find?2. Have you heard of tsunami?
What is this and what damage do
you think it might have done tothe life of fishing families like
Aruna's?  Rural Livelihoods/ 75QUESTIONS1. You have probably noticed that people in Kalpattu are engaged in a
variety of non-farm work. List five of these.
2.List the different types of people you read about in Kalpattu who
depend on farming.  Who is the poorest among them and why?
3.Imagine you are a member of a fishing family and you are discussing
whether to take a loan from the bank for an engine. What would you
say? 4.Poor rural labourers like Thulasi often do not have access to good
medical facilities, good schools, and other resources.  You have read

about inequality in the first unit of this text.  The difference between

her and Ramalingam is one of inequality. Do you think this is a fairsituation?  What do you think can be done?  Discuss in class.5.What do you think the government can do to help farmers like Sekar
when they get into debt?  Discuss.6.Compare the situation of Sekar and Ramalingam by filling out the
following table:SEKARRAMALINGAMLandcultivatedLabourrequired
Loansrequired
Selling ofharvestOther workdone by them  