In a democracy people expect thegovernment to work for their welfare. This
could be through the provision of
education, health, employment, housing
or the development of roads, electricity
etc. In this chapter we shall examine the
meanings and problems related to health.
Look at the sub-headings of this chapter.
In what ways do you think this topic is
related to the work of government?2CHAPTERRole of theRole of theRole of theRole of theRole of theGovernmentGovernmentGovernmentGovernmentGovernmentin Healthin Health
in Healthin Health
in Health  What is health?We can think of health in many ways. Health meansour ability to remain free of illness and injuries. But
health isn™t only about disease. You may have
associated only some of the situations in the above
collage with health. What we often ignore is the fact
that each of the above situations is related to health.
Apart from disease, we need to think of other factors
that affect our health. For example, if people get clean
drinking water or a pollution free environment they
are likely to be healthy. On the other hand, if people
do not get adequate food to eat or have to live in
cramped conditions, they will be prone to illness.All of us would like to be active and in good spiritsin whatever we may be doing. It isn™t healthy to be
dull, inactive, anxious or scared for long stretches of
time. We all need to be without mental strain. All of
these various aspects of our lives are a part of health.Pick two situations from the abovePick two situations from the abovePick two situations from the abovePick two situations from the abovePick two situations from the abovecollage that are not related tocollage that are not related tocollage that are not related tocollage that are not related tocollage that are not related toillness and write two sentences onillness and write two sentences onillness and write two sentences onillness and write two sentences onillness and write two sentences onhow they are related to health.how they are related to health.how they are related to health.how they are related to health.how they are related to health.Would you associate all or some ofWould you associate all or some ofWould you associate all or some ofWould you associate all or some ofWould you associate all or some ofthese pictures with ‚health™ ? Inthese pictures with ‚health™ ? Inthese pictures with ‚health™ ? Inthese pictures with ‚health™ ? Inthese pictures with ‚health™ ? Inwhat ways? Discuss in groups.what ways? Discuss in groups.what ways? Discuss in groups.what ways? Discuss in groups.what ways? Discuss in groups.19Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health  20Social and Political LifeIn India, it is often said that weIn India, it is often said that weIn India, it is often said that weIn India, it is often said that weIn India, it is often said that weare unable to provide healthare unable to provide healthare unable to provide healthare unable to provide healthare unable to provide healthservices for all because theservices for all because theservices for all because theservices for all because theservices for all because thegovernment does not have enoughgovernment does not have enoughgovernment does not have enoughgovernment does not have enoughgovernment does not have enoughmoney and facilities. After readingmoney and facilities. After readingmoney and facilities. After readingmoney and facilities. After readingmoney and facilities. After readingthe above left hand column, dothe above left hand column, dothe above left hand column, dothe above left hand column, dothe above left hand column, doyou think this is true? Discuss.you think this is true? Discuss.you think this is true? Discuss.you think this is true? Discuss.you think this is true? Discuss.Can you provide a title to theseCan you provide a title to theseCan you provide a title to theseCan you provide a title to theseCan you provide a title to thesecolumns?columns?
columns?columns?
columns?India has the largest number of medicalMost doctors settle in urban areas.colleges in the world and is among thePeople in rural areas have to travel longlargest producers of doctors.distances to reach a doctor.  The numberApproximately15,000 new doctors qualifyof doctors with respect to the population isev
ery year.much less in rural areas.Healthcare facilities have grownAbout five lakh people die from tuberculosissubstantially over the years. In 1950,ev
ery year.  This number is almostthere were only 2,717 hospitals in India.unchanged since Independence!In 1991, there were 11,174 hospitals. InAlmost two million cases of malaria are2000, the number grew to 18,218.reported every year and this number isn™tdecreasing.India gets a large number of medicalWe are not able to provide clean drinkingtourists from many countries. They comewater to all. 21per cent of allfor treatment in some of the hospitals in communicable diseases are water borne.India that compare with the best in the world. For example, diarrhoea, worms, hepatitis, etc.India is the fourth largest producer ofHalf of all children  in India do notmedicines in the world and is also a largeget  adequate food to eat and areexporter of medicines.undernourished.Healthcare in IndiaLet us examine some of the aspects of healthcare inIndia. Compare and contrast the situation expressed
in the first and second columns. In order to prevent and treat illnesses we needappropriate healthcare facilities such as health
centres, hospitals, laboratories for testing,
ambulance services, blood banks, etc., that can
provide the required care and services that patients
need. In order to run such facilities we need health
workers, nurses, qualified doctors and other health
professionals who can advice, diagnose and treat
illnesses. We also need the medicines and equipment
that are necessary for treating patients. These
facilities are required to take care of us.  21Hakim Sheik was a member of the Paschim Banga Khet Mazdoor Samity (PBKMS), an organisationof agricultural labourers in West Bengal. One evening in 1992, he accidentally fell off a runningtrain and suffered head injuries. He was in a very serious condition and needed immediatetreatment.He was taken to a gov
ernment hospital in Kolkata but they refused to admit him because theydid not have a spare bed. Another hospital did not have the facility or the specialised doctorsnecessary for his treatment. In this way he spent 14 hours in a critical state and was taken toeight different gov
ernment hospitals, but none of them admitted him.Finally,
 he was admitted in a private hospital, where he received treatment. He spent a lot ofmoney on his treatment. Angry and upset over the indifferent attitude of all the hospitals thatrefused to admit him, Hakim Sheik and PBKMS filed a case in the court.The story of Hakim SheikRead the story given above. ThenRead the story given above. ThenRead the story given above. ThenRead the story given above. ThenRead the story given above. Thenimagine that you are a Judge inimagine that you are a Judge inimagine that you are a Judge inimagine that you are a Judge inimagine that you are a Judge inthe court. What would you say tothe court. What would you say tothe court. What would you say tothe court. What would you say tothe court. What would you say toHakim Sheik?Hakim Sheik?Hakim Sheik?Hakim Sheik?Hakim Sheik?Patients usually have to wait in long
queues in public hospitals, like this one.India has a large number of doctors, clinics andhospitals. The country also has considerable
experience and knowledge in running a publichealthcare system. This is a system of hospitals and
health centres run by the government. It has the
ability to look after the health of a large section of its
population scattered over hundreds of thousands of
villages. We will go into more detail on this later.
Moreover, there has been a phenomenal
advancement in medical sciences whereby many new
technologies and treatment procedures are available
in the country.However, the second column points out how poorthe health situation in our country is. With all the
above positive developments we are not able to
provide proper healthcare facilities to people. This is
the paradox Œ something that is contrary to what we
would expect. Our country has the money, knowledge
and people with experience but cannot make the
necessary healthcare available to all. In this chapter,
we will look at some of the reasons for this.Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health  THE COST OF A CUREAman and Ranjan are good friends. While Ranjancomes from a well-to-do family, 
Aman™s parents have
to struggle to make ends meet...Hi Aman! Good tosee you back! How have
you been?I had viral fev
er andhad to go to thehospital...Oh! Me, too! I just got back toschool on Monday.
 My Daddytook me to see the doctorat the new hospital inKingsway.
 It was very exciting!The building looked so posh. I thought itwas a five star hotel! Daddy said that wasbecause it was a private hospital, with thebest of facilities.Daddy had to pay Rs 500 at the reception counteritself Œ before we even met the doctor! There wasnice music playing and everything was really cleanand shiny.
The doctor asked for many tests...butev
eryone was so friendly! The lady who tookmy blood for testing told me so many jokesthat I forgot to feel the pain!...and have youheard the oneabout Batmanon Reality TV?After the test results came, we went back to thedoctor. He looked through them and said everythingwas fine, and I only had viral fev
er. He prescribed lotsof medicines and rest....and so young man Œ this pink pill should betaken three times a day,
 and the white tabletonce before bed time Œ that™s for thebodyache! This one is a syrup Œ don™tworry,
 it™s tastyThank youDoctor...I feelbetteralready!  You see, I™ve been dying to tell you allabout it! But what aboutyou? Which hospital didyou go to?Um...it wasn™t as nice as your™sat all! At first, Abba didn™t wantto take me because he said itwould take too much time...When our turn came, the doctor examined me, andasked for a blood test. Then we had to go and stand inanother long queue! People were crowding around inthe testing room too.We got the test results after three days...and wentback to the hospital. There was a different doctorthat day.
Show me his OPDcard...and the test resultsŒ quickly please!He seems to be suffering froma bout of viral fev
er Œ nothingto worry about. All he needs isthis one fev
er-reducingmedicine.My hospital was nice, butthey gave me too manymedicines and the wholething cost more thanRs 3,500!That much! Mytreatment cost justRs 150!...and it really did! We went to a bigGovernment Hospital. W
e had to wait in a longqueue at the OPD counter. I was feeling so sickthat I had to lean on Abba all the time!  24Social and Political LifeWhy did Ranjan have to spend soWhy did Ranjan have to spend soWhy did Ranjan have to spend soWhy did Ranjan have to spend soWhy did Ranjan have to spend somuch money? Give reasons.much money? Give reasons.much money? Give reasons.much money? Give reasons.much money? Give reasons.What problems did Aman face inWhat problems did Aman face inWhat problems did Aman face inWhat problems did Aman face inWhat problems did Aman face inthe public hospital? How do youthe public hospital? How do youthe public hospital? How do youthe public hospital? How do youthe public hospital? How do youthink the hospital can work in athink the hospital can work in athink the hospital can work in athink the hospital can work in athink the hospital can work in abetter manner? Discuss.better manner? Discuss.better manner? Discuss.better manner? Discuss.better manner? Discuss.Where do you go when you are ill?Where do you go when you are ill?Where do you go when you are ill?Where do you go when you are ill?Where do you go when you are ill?Are there any problems that youAre there any problems that youAre there any problems that youAre there any problems that youAre there any problems that youface? Write a paragraph based onface? Write a paragraph based onface? Write a paragraph based onface? Write a paragraph based onface? Write a paragraph based onyour experience.your experience.your experience.your experience.your experience.What problems do we face inWhat problems do we face inWhat problems do we face inWhat problems do we face inWhat problems do we face inprivate hospitals? Discuss.private hospitals? Discuss.private hospitals? Discuss.private hospitals? Discuss.private hospitals? Discuss.Public and private health care servicesFrom the above story, you must have understoodthat we can roughly divide up various health care
facilities in two categories Œ(a) Public health services and(b) Private health facilities.Public health services
The public health service is a chain of health centresand hospitals run by the government. They are linked
together so that they cover both rural and urban
areas and can also provide treatment to all kinds of
problems Œ from common illnesses to special services.
At the village level there are health centres where
there is usually a nurse and a village health worker.
They are trained in dealing with common illnesses
and work under the supervision of doctors at the
Primary Health Centre (PHC). Such a centre covers
many villages in a rural area. At the district level is
the District Hospital that also supervises all the
health centres. Large cities have many government
hospitals such as the one where Aman was taken
and also specialised government hospitals such as
the ones in Hakim Sheik™s story.The health service is called ‚public™ for manyreasons. In order to fulfil its commitment of providing
health care to all citizens, the government has
established these hospitals and health centres. Also,
the resources needed to run these services are
obtained from the money that we, the public, pay to
the government as taxes. Hence, such facilities are
meant for everyone. One of the most important
aspects of the public health system is that it is meant
to provide quality health care services either free or
at a low cost, so that even the poor can seek
treatment. Another important function of public
health is to take action to prevent the spread of
diseases such as TB, malaria, jaundice, cholera,Why pay taxes to the government?Why pay taxes to the government?Why pay taxes to the government?Why pay taxes to the government?Why pay taxes to the government?Government uses tax money forproviding many public services for
the benefit of all citizens. Some
services such as defence, police,
judicial system, highways etc.
benefit all citizens. Otherwise, the
citizens cannot organise these
services for themselves.Taxes fund developmentalprogrammes and services such as
education, health care,
employment, social welfare,
vocational training etc. required for
needy citizens. Tax money is
utilised for relief and rehabilitation
in case of natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, tsunami etc.
Space, nuclear, and missile
programmes are also funded from
the revenues collected as taxes.Government provides someservices especially for the poor
who cannot afford to purchase
them from the market. One
example is health care. Can you
give other examples?  25In what ways is the public healthIn what ways is the public healthIn what ways is the public healthIn what ways is the public healthIn what ways is the public healthsystem meant for everyone?system meant for everyone?system meant for everyone?system meant for everyone?system meant for everyone?List some Primary Health CentresList some Primary Health CentresList some Primary Health CentresList some Primary Health CentresList some Primary Health Centres(PHCs) or hospitals near your(PHCs) or hospitals near your(PHCs) or hospitals near your(PHCs) or hospitals near your(PHCs) or hospitals near yourplace. From your experience (or byplace. From your experience (or byplace. From your experience (or byplace. From your experience (or byplace. From your experience (or byvisiting any one of them), find outvisiting any one of them), find outvisiting any one of them), find outvisiting any one of them), find outvisiting any one of them), find outthe facilities provided and peoplethe facilities provided and peoplethe facilities provided and peoplethe facilities provided and peoplethe facilities provided and peoplewho run the centre.who run the centre.who run the centre.who run the centre.who run the centre.A doctor in a rural health care centre givingmedicines to a patient.diarrhoea, chikungunya, etc. This has to be organisedby the government with the participation of people
otherwise it is not effective. For example, when taking
up a campaign to see that mosquitoes do not breed
in water coolers, rooftops, etc., this has to be done
for all houses in the area.Recall the case of Hakim Sheik. Would you like toknow what the court said in this case?According to our Constitution, it is the primaryduty of the government to ensure the welfare of the
people and provide health care facilities to all.The government must safeguard the Right to Lifeof every person. The Court said that the difficulty
that Hakim Sheik had to face could have cost him
his life. If a hospital cannot provide timely medical
treatment to a person, it means that this protection
of life is not being given.The Court also said that it was the duty of thegovernment to provide the necessary health services,
including treatment in emergency situations.
Hospitals and medical staff must fulfil their duty of
providing the necessary treatment. Hakim Sheik was
denied treatment at various government hospitals.
Therefore, the Court asked the State Government to
give him the money that he had spent on his
treatment.Private health facilities
There is a wide range of private health facilities thatexist in our country. A large number of doctors run
their own private clinics. In the rural areas, one finds
Registered Medical Practitioners (RMPs). Urban areas
have a large number of doctors, many of them
providing specialised services. There are hospitals
and nursing homes that are privately owned. There
are many laboratories that do tests and offer special
facilities such as X-ray, ultrasound, etc. There are
also shops from where we buy medicines.A woman and her sick child at a governmenthospital. According to UNICEF, more thantwo million  children die every year in India frompreventable infections.Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health  Private health facilities can meanPrivate health facilities can meanPrivate health facilities can meanPrivate health facilities can meanPrivate health facilities can meanmany things. Explain with the helpmany things. Explain with the helpmany things. Explain with the helpmany things. Explain with the helpmany things. Explain with the helpof some examples from your area.of some examples from your area.of some examples from your area.of some examples from your area.of some examples from your area.In rural areas, a jeep is often used to serveas a mobile clinic for patients.As the name suggests, private health facilitiesare not owned or controlled by the government.
Unlike the public health services, in private
facilities, patients have to pay a lot of money for
every service that they use.Today the presence of private facilities can be seenall around. In fact now there are large companies
that run hospitals and some are engaged in
manufacturing and selling medicines. Medical shops
are found in every corner of the country.Healthcare and equality:Is adequate healthcare available to all?In India, we face a situation where private servicesare increasing but public services are not. What is
then available to people are mainly private services.
These are concentrated in urban areas. As these
services are run for profit, the cost of these services
is rather high. Medicines are expensive. Many people
cannot afford them or have to borrow money when
there is an illness in the family.In order to earn more money, these private servicesencourage practices that are incorrect. At times
cheaper methods, though available, are not used.
For example, it is common to find doctors prescribing
unnecessary medicines, injections or saline bottles
when tablets or simple medicines can suffice.In fact, barely 20 per cent of the population canafford all the medicines that they require during anA post-operative room in a leading
private hospital in Delhi.26Social and Political Life  This pregnant lady has to travel manykilometres to see a qualified doctor.illness. Hence, even for those whom one might not
think as being poor, medical expenses cause
hardship. It was reported in a study that 40 per cent
of people who are admitted to a hospital for some
illness or injury have to borrow money or sell some
of their possessions to pay for the expenses.For those who are poor, every illness in the familyis a cause of great anxiety and distress. What is worse
is that this situation tends to happen again and
again. Those who are poor are in the first place
undernourished. These families are not eating as
much as they should. They are not provided basic
necessities like drinking water, adequate housing,
clean surroundings, etc., and therefore, are more
likely to fall ill. The expenses on illness make their
situation even worse.Sometimes it is not only the lack of money thatprevents people from getting proper medical
treatment. Women, for example, are not taken to a
doctor in a prompt manner. Women™s health
concerns are considered to be less important than
the health of men in the family. Many tribal areas
have few health centres and they do not run properly.
Even private health services are not available.What can be done?There is little doubt that the health situation of mostpeople in our country is not good. It is the
responsibility of the government to provide quality
healthcare services to all its citizens, especially the
poor and the disadvantaged. However, health is as
much dependent on basic amenities and social
conditions of the people, as it is on healthcare
services. Hence, it is important to work on both in
order to improve the health situation of our people.
And this can be done. Look at the following exampleŒChapter 2: Role of the Government in Health27  28Social and Political LifeThe Kerala experienceIn 1996, the Kerala government made some majorchanges in the state. Forty per cent of the entire state
budget was given to panchayats. They could plan
and provide for their requirements. This made it
possible for a village to make sure that proper
planning was done for water, food, women™s
development and education. This meant that water
supply schemes were checked, the working of schools
and anganwadis was ensured and specific problemsof the village were taken up. Health centres were
also improved. All of this helped to improve the
situation. Despite these efforts, however, some
problems Œ such as shortage of medicines,
insufficient hospital beds, not enough doctors Œ
remained, and these needed to be addressed.Let us look at an example of another country andits approach to issues of health.The Costa Rican approach
Costa Rica is considered to be one of the healthiestcountries in South America. The main reason for
this can be found in the Costa Rican Constitution.
Several years ago, Costa Rica took a very important
decision and decided not to have an army. This
helped the Costa Rican government to spend the
money that the army would have used, on health,
education and other basic needs of the people. The
Costa Rican government believes that a country has
to be healthy for its development and pays a lot of
attention to the health of its people. The Costa Rican
government provides basic services and amenities
to all Costa Ricans. For example, it provides safe
drinking water, sanitation, nutrition and housing.
Health education is also considered very important
and knowledge about health is an essential part of
education at all levels.The above map of India shows the state of
Kerala in pink.page 123 of this book has a map of India.
Using your pencil outline the state of Kerala on
this map.* Telangana became the 29th State of India onthe 2nd June 2014, after the reorganisation ofthe State of Andhra Pradesh.  291.In this chapter you have read that health is a wider conceptthan illness. Look at this quote from the Constitution and
explain the terms ‚living standard™ and ‚public health™ in
your own words.2. What are the different ways through which the
government can take steps to provide healthcare for all?
Discuss.3.What differences do you find between private and public
health services in your area? Use the following table to
compare and contrast these.EXERCISESFacilityFacility
FacilityFacility
FacilityCost of servicesCost of servicesCost of servicesCost of servicesCost of servicesAvailability of serviceAvailability of serviceAvailability of serviceAvailability of serviceAvailability of servicePrivatePublicAn important part of theAn important part of theAn important part of theAn important part of theAn important part of theConstitution says it is the ﬁduty ofConstitution says it is the ﬁduty ofConstitution says it is the ﬁduty ofConstitution says it is the ﬁduty ofConstitution says it is the ﬁduty ofthe State to raise the level ofthe State to raise the level ofthe State to raise the level ofthe State to raise the level ofthe State to raise the level ofnutrition and the standard ofnutrition and the standard ofnutrition and the standard ofnutrition and the standard ofnutrition and the standard ofliving and to improve publicliving and to improve publicliving and to improve publicliving and to improve publicliving and to improve publichealth.ﬂhealth.ﬂ
health.ﬂhealth.ﬂ
health.ﬂ4.‚Improvement in water and sanitation can control manydiseases.™ Explain with the help of examples.GlossaryPublic:Public:
Public:Public:
Public: An activity or service that is meant for all people in the country and is mainly organised bythe government. This includes schools, hospitals, telephone services, etc. People can demandthese services and also raise questions about their non-functioning.Private:Private:
Private:Private:
Private: An activity or service that is organised by an individual or company for their own profit.Medical tourists:Medical tourists:Medical tourists:Medical tourists:Medical tourists: This refers to foreigners who come to this country specifically for medical treatmentat hospitals that offer worldŒclass facilities at a lower cost than what they would have to pay intheir own countries.Communicable diseases:Communicable diseases:Communicable diseases:Communicable diseases:Communicable diseases: These are diseases that are spread from one person to another in manyways such as through water, food , air, etc.OPD: OPD: 
OPD: OPD: 
OPD: This is the short form for ‚Out Patient Department™. This is where people are first brought inand treated in a hospital without being admitted to any special ward.Chapter 2: Role of the Government in Health  