68UNITFOUR  69Media and AdvertisingTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteToday, the media and advertising are apervasive presence in the lives of youngpeople, who may or may not have takenthe opportunity to seriously reflect uponthis fact. This Unit offers some ways bywhich we can begin to think about these.The focus in ‚Understanding Media™ is onexplaining the strong links between mediaand technology and media and bigbusiness.  It explains how     the media ‚setsthe agenda™ through influencing our
perception of issues worth devoting timeand attention to, and issues that areneglected or overridden. In ‚UnderstandingAdvertising™ we have focused both oncritically analysing how advertisingstrategies influence customers, as well asdemonstrating what goes into the makingof an advertisement.  The significance of a‚brand™ and the need to promote theuniqueness of a product is a key part ofadvertising. The chapter identifies themechanisms that advertisements use     toappeal to the consumer, and explains how
these are powerfully linked to theconsumer™s self-image.Chapters 6 and 7 foreground thewidespread effects of the media and
advertising, and attempt to connect theissues under discussion to the learner™sown lives.  At the end of the media chapter,we expect the learner to recognise the roleof big business in the media coverage ofevents Š the way ‚news™ is selected forcoverage, and the explicit/implicitdimensions of that coverage. We use twofictitious news reports to demonstrate     thatthere is seldom just one version of a storyor an event.  Building on this, we expectthe learner to develop the skills requiredto critically analyse a newspaper report ora TV story through scrutinising theinformation provided, as well asunderstanding the logic behind theexclusion of certain perspectives.In the advertising chapter, two fictitiousadvertisements have been created tosystematically take the learner through  thetechniques of crafting advertisements thatappeal to the consumer. The examplesfocus on the significance of the key terms‚brand™ and ‚brand values™ that are integralto advertising. These ideas can bestrengthened by selecting examples fromactual advertisements and structuringsimilar questions around them.Both chapters conclude by linking theircontents to the idea of democracy.  Both
emphasise, through using examples oflocal media as well as social advertising,how mainstream media and advertisingtend to favour those who have greaterfinancial as well as social resources. Thispoint can be reinforced in the classroomby using local examples of media stories,as well as posing questions about the waysin which advertising is changing what islocally available as well as locally valued.69  Understanding MediaWhat is your favourite TV programme? What do you like listening to onthe radio?  Which newspaper or magazine do you usually read? Do yousurf the internet and what have you found most useful about it? Did youknow that there is one word that is often used to collectively refer tothe radio, TV, newspapers, Internet and several other forms ofcommunication. This word is ‚media™. In this chapter, you will readmore about the media. You will find out what is required to make itwork, as well as the ways in which the media affects our daily lives. Canyou think of one thing that you have learnt from the media this week?6CHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTER  Look at the collage on the left andlist six various kinds of media thatyou see.An artist™s impression of Gutenbergprinting the first sheet of the Bible.Ask older members of your familyabout what they used to listen toon the radio when there was noTV around. Find out from themwhen the first TV came to yourarea. When was cable TVintroduced?How many people in yourneighbourhood use the Internet?List three things that you knowabout some other part of theworld from watching television?Everything ranging from the stall at the local fair tothe programme that you see on TV can be calledmedia. Media is the plural form of the word ‚medium™and it describes the various ways through which wecommunicate in society. Because media refers to allmeans of communication, everything ranging froma phone call to the evening news on TV can be calledmedia. TV, radio and newspapers are a form of mediathat reaches millions of people, or the masses, acrossthe country and the world and, thus, they are calledmass media.Media and technologyMedia and technologyMedia and technologyMedia and technologyMedia and technologyIt would probably be difficult for you to imagine your
life without the media. But cable television and thewidespread use of the Internet is a recentphenomenon. These have been around for less thantwenty years. The technology that mass media useskeeps changing.Newspapers, television and radio can reachmillions of people because they use certain
technologies. We also tend to discuss newspapersand magazines as the print media; and TV and radioas the electronic media. Why do you thinknewspapers are called print media? As you readfurther, you will find that this naming is related tothe different technologies that these media use. Thefollowing photographs will give you a sense of theways in which technology that mass media uses haschanged over the years and continues to change.Changing technology, or machines, and makingtechnology more modern, helps media to reach more
people. It also improves the quality of sound and theimages that you see. But technology does more thanthis. It also changes the ways in which we think aboutour lives. For example, today it is quite difficult forus to think of our lives without television. Televisionhas enabled us to think of ourselves as members ofa larger global world. Television images travel huge71Chapter 6: Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media  72Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeCan you list three differentproducts that are advertisedduring your favourite TVprogramme?Take a newspaper and count thenumber of advertisements in it.Some people say that newspapershave too many advertisements. Doyou think this is true and why?John L. Baird sits in front of theapparatus with which he demonstrated tothe Royal Institute, his invention, the‚televisor™, an early television.With electronic typerwriters, journalismunderwent a sea-change in the 1940s.distances through satellites and cables. This allowsus to view news and entertainment channels fromother parts of the world. Most of the cartoons thatyou see on television are mostly from Japan or theUnited States. We can now be sitting in Chennai orJammu and can see images of a storm that has hitthe coast of Florida in the United States. Televisionhas brought the world closer to us.Media and moneyMedia and moneyMedia and moneyMedia and moneyMedia and moneyThe different technologies that mass media use are
expensive. Just think about the TV studio in whichthe newsreader sits Œ it has lights, cameras, soundrecorders, transmission satellites, etc., all of whichcost a lot of money.In a news studio, it is not only the newsreaderwho needs to be paid but also a number of other
people who help put the broadcast together. Thisincludes those who look after the cameras and lights.Also, as you read earlier the technologies that massmedia use keep changing and so a lot of money isspent on getting the latest technology. Due to thesecosts, the mass media needs a great deal of moneyto do its work. As a result, most television channelsand newspapers are part of big business houses.Mass media is constantly thinking of ways to makemoney. One way in which the mass media earns
money is by advertising different things like cars,chocolates, clothes, mobile phones, etc. You musthave noticed the number of advertisements that youhave to see while watching your favourite televisionshow. While watching a cricket match on TV, thesame advertisements are shown repeatedly betweeneach over and so you are often watching the sameimage over and over again. As you will read in thefollowing chapter, advertisements are repeated in thehope that you will go out and buy what is advertised.  73The cost to advertise on a news channelvaries from Rs 500 to Rs 8,000 per 10seconds depending on the popularity ofthe channel.Media and democracyMedia and democracyMedia and democracyMedia and democracyMedia and democracyIn a democracy, the media plays a very importantrole in providing news and discussing events takingplace in the country and the world. It is on the basisof this information that citizens can, for example,learn how government works. And often, if they wishto, they can take action on the basis of these newsstories. Some of the ways in which they can do thisis by writing letters to the concerned minister,organising a public protestpublic protestpublic protestpublic protestpublic protest, starting a signaturecampaign, asking the government to rethink its
programme, etc.Given the role that the media plays in providinginformation, it is important that the information be
balanced. Let us understand what we mean by abalanced media report by reading two versions ofthe same news event given on the next page.Chapter 6: Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media Understanding Media  74Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeViolent protests by ownersand workers brought thecity to a standstill today.People getting to workcould not do so on timebecause of huge trafficjams. The owners andworkers are protesting thegovernment™s decision toclose down pollutingfactory units. Although thegovernment did take thisdecision rather hastily, theprotestors have known forquite some time that theirunits are not legal.Crackdown on polluting factoriesProtestors block roads and disrupt trafficMoreover the levels ofpollution in the city will begreatly reduced by thisclosure. Mr. Jain a well-known figure in the citysaid, ﬁWith our citygradually becomingIndias™s new business hub,it is important that it be aclean and green city.Polluting factories shouldbe moved. The factoryowners and workersshould accept therelocation being offered bythe government instead ofprotesting.ﬂRadhika Malik | INNAre the above stories in the twonewspapers similar? And if not,why not? What, in your view, arethe similarities and thedifferences?If you read the story in the Newsof India, what would you thinkabout the issue?The closure of one lakh factories in thecity™s residential areas is likely to becomea serious issue. On Monday, thousands of factoryowners and workers took to the streets to stronglyprotest this closure. They said that theirlivelihoods would be lost. They say that the faultlies with the municipal corporation because itcontinued to issue licenses for new factories tobe set up in residential areas.They also say thatthere were no adequate relocation efforts. Theowners and workers plan a one-day city bandhto protest against this closure. Mr. Sharma, oneof the factory owners said, ﬁThe government saysthat it has done a lot to relocate us. But the areasthey have sent us to have no facilities and havenot been developed for the last five years.ﬂClosure of factories causes unrestDaily News ServiceNews of India Report
India Daily Report
The fact is that if you had read either newspaperyou would only know one side of the story. If youhad read the News of India, you would most likelythink of the protestors as a nuisance. Their
disrupting traffic and continually polluting the citywith their factories leaves you with a bad impressionabout them. But on the other hand, if you had readthe story in the India Daily, you would know thatthe protests are because a lot of livelihoods will be
lost if the factories close because the relocation effortshave not been adequate. Neither of these stories is abalanced report. A balanced report is one thatdiscusses all points of view of a particular story andthen leaves it to the readers to make up their minds.Writing a balanced report, however, depends onthe media being independent. An independent mediameans that no one should control and influence itscoverage of news. No one should tell the media what  