UNITTHREE  GenderTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteGender is a term that you may often haveheard. It is a term, however, that is noteasily understood. It tends to remaindistant from our lives and restricted todiscussions during training programmes.In fact, it is something that all of usexperience in our lives on a daily basis. Itdetermines, for example, who we are andwhat we will become, where we can go andwhere not, the life choices available to usand those we eventually make. Ourunderstanding of gender is often based onthe family and society that we live in. Thisleads us to think that the roles we see menand women around us play are fixed andnatural. In fact, these roles differ acrosscommunities around the world. By gender,then, we mean the many social values andstereotypes our cultures attach to thebiological distinction ‚male™ and ‚female™. Itis a term that helps us to understand manyof the inequalities and power relationsbetween men and women in society.The following two chapters explore theconcept of gender without actually using
the term. Instead, through differentpedagogic tools like case studies, stories,classroom activities, data analysis andphotographs, students are encouraged toquestion and think about their own livesand the society around them. Gender isoften mistakenly thought to be somethingthat concerns women or girls alone. Thus,care has been taken in these chapters todraw boys into the discussion as well.Chapter 4 uses two case studies, situatedin different places and points in time toshow how girls and boys are brought upor socialised differently. This enables themto understand that the process ofsocialisation is not uniform; instead it issocially determined and changescontinuously over time. The chapter alsoaddresses the fact that societies assigndifferent values to the roles men andwomen play and the work they do, whichbecomes a basis for inequality anddiscrimination. Through a storyboard,students discuss the issue of housework.Done primarily by women, housework isoften not considered ‚work™ and, thereforemade invisible and devalued. Chapter 5 further develops ideas aroundgender inequalities in the world of work and
describes women™s struggles for equality.Through a classroom activity, studentsbegin questioning existing stereotypesregarding work and career choices. Thechapter also points out that opportunitieslike education are not equally available toboys and girls. By reading about the livesof two Indian women, from the ninteenthand twentieth centuries, students see howwomen struggled to change their lives bylearning to read and write. Change on alarge scale usually takes place throughcollective struggles. The chapter concludeswith a photo-essay that gives examples ofdifferent strategies the women™s movementhas used to fight for change.
43  Growing up asBoys and GirlsBeing a boy or a girl is animportant part of one™sidentity. The society we growup in teaches us what kind ofbehaviour is acceptable forgirls and boys, what boys andgirls can or cannot do. Weoften grow up thinking thatthese things are exactly thesame everywhere. But do allsocieties look at boys andgirls in the same way? We willtry and answer this questionin this chapter. We will alsolook at how the different rolesassigned to boys and girlsprepare them for their futureroles as men and women. Wewill learn that most societiesvalue men and womendifferently. The roles womenplay and the work they do areusually valued less than theroles men play and the workthey do. This chapter will alsoexamine how inequalitiesbetween men and womenemerge in the area of work.4CHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTER  In what ways do the experiencesof Samoan children and teenagersdiffer from your own experiencesof growing up? Is there anythingin this experience that you wishwas part of your growing up?A Class VII Samoan childin his school uniform.Why do girls like to go to schooltogether in groups?Growing up in Samoa in the 1920sGrowing up in Samoa in the 1920sGrowing up in Samoa in the 1920sGrowing up in Samoa in the 1920sGrowing up in Samoa in the 1920sThe Samoan Islands are part of a large group of smallislands in the southern part of the Pacific Ocean. In
the 1920s, according to research reports on Samoansociety, children did not go to school. They learntmany things, such as how to take care of children ordo household work from older children and fromadults. Fishing was a very important activity on the
islands. Young people, therefore, learnt to undertakelong fishing expeditions. But they learnt these thingsat different points in their childhood.As soon as babies could walk, their mothers orother adults no longer looked after them. Older
children, often as young as five years old, took over
this responsibility. Both boys and girls looked aftertheir younger siblings. But, by the time a boy wasabout nine years old, he joined the older boys inlearning outdoor jobs like fishing and plantingcoconuts. Girls had to continue looking after smallchildren or do errands for adults till they wereteenagers. But, once they became teenagers they had
much more freedom. After the age of fourteen or so,girls also went on fishing trips, worked in theplantations, learnt how to weave baskets. Cookingwas done in special cooking-houses, where boys weresupposed to do most of the work while girls helped
with the preparations.Growing up male inGrowing up male inGrowing up male inGrowing up male inGrowing up male inMadhya Pradesh in the 1960sMadhya Pradesh in the 1960sMadhya Pradesh in the 1960sMadhya Pradesh in the 1960sMadhya Pradesh in the 1960sThe following is adapted from an account ofexperiences of being in a small town in MadhyaPradesh in the 1960s.From Class VI onwards, boys and girls went toseparate schools. The girls™ school was designed very
differently from the boys™ school. They had a centralcourtyard where they played in total seclusion and45Chapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls  Make a drawing of a street or apark in your neighbourhood. Showthe different kinds of activitiesyoung boys and girls may beengaged in. You could do thisindividually or in groups.Are there as many girls as boys inyour drawing? Most probably youwould have drawn fewer girls. Canyou think of reasons why thereare fewer women and girls in yourneighbourhood streets, parks andmarkets in the late evenings or atnight?Are girls and boys doing differentactivities? Can you think ofreasons why this might be so?What would happen if youreplaced the girls with the boysand vice-versa?safety from the outside world. The boys™ school hadno such courtyard and our playground was just abig space attached to the school. Every evening, onceschool was over, the boys watched as hundreds ofschool girls crowded the narrow streets. As thesegirls walked on the streets, they looked so purposeful.This was unlike the boys who used the streets as aplace to stand around idling, to play, to try out trickswith their bicycles. For the girls, the street was simplya place to get straight home. The girls always wentin groups, perhaps because they also carried fearsof being teased or attacked.After reading the two examples above, we realisethat there are many different ways of growing up.Often we think that there is only one way in whichchildren grow up. This is because we are mostfamiliar with our own experiences. If we talk to eldersin our family, we will see that their childhoods wereprobably very different from ours.We also realise that societies make cleardistinctions between boys and girls. This begins from
a very young age. We are for example, given differenttoys to play with. Boys are usually given cars to playwith and girls dolls. Both toys can be a lot of fun toplay with. Why are girls then given dolls and boyscars? Toys become a way of telling children that theywill have different futures when they become menand women. If we think about it, this difference iscreated in the smallest and most everyday things.How girls must dress, what games boys should play,how girls need to talk softly or boys need to be tough.All these are ways of telling children that they havespecific roles to play when they grow up to be menand women. Later in life this affects the subjects wecan study or the careers we can choose.In most societies, including our own, the roles menand women play or the work they do, are not valued
equally. Men and women do not have the samestatus. Let us look at how this difference exists inthe work done by men and women.46Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political Life  Ma, we are going on a
school excursion. Rosie Ma™amneeds volunteers. Can™t you
take a holiday from office
and volunteer?‚MY MOTHER
DOES NOT WORK™
Harmeet™s mother
always comes for
excursions, beauseshe doesn™t work.
Shonali, how can
you say that! You
know that Jaspreet
aunty is up at 5 a.m.everyday doing all
the housework!
Yes, but that™s not real
work, it™s just house work!
Oh! That™s what you
think, do you? Let™s go over
to their house and askJaspreet what she thinks!Harsharan, Shonalithinks that your wife
is not a working
person!But isn™t that correct aunty?
My mother is a housewife Œ
she does not work!
Then Jaspreet, why don™t
you just relax and let them
manage everything for a
change?Great idea!
OK, I™ll go on strike
tomorrow!
What fun! We™ll take care
of everything tomorrow
Œ with Papa!
Oh God! Look at the time!Where™s my breakfast? Why aren™t
the children ready?
Ha, ha!How would I know?
I™m on strike, remember?
Besides, Mangala has alsotaken leave today.
Oh-ho! That™s
the school bus! I™llhave to drop
them in the car.
Hurry, hurry! And
ask Harmeet to switchon the pump!At the Singh™s house
Next morning, 7:30 a.m.
HONKHONK  48Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeBut, what about the kids™ lunch boxes?
Oh no! Forgot
about that!I™ll give you some money. Just
buy something from thecanteen today...
Ma already gave us
money for that!
Evening, 6.00 p.m.
I™m exhausted! How about
some tea? Oh, I forgot...your
strike...I™ll make some myself.
The house looks like it
was hit by a hurricane!Did you expect it to remain in exactly the
same condition in which you left it this
morning, dear?Harmeet, where
on earth are the
tea leaves?
Hee hee...
I wonder if they
still believe I don™t
work?...and now I have
to remind them that
Chachaji and Chachijiare coming
for dinner.
DINGDINGValuing houseworkValuing houseworkValuing houseworkValuing houseworkValuing houseworkHarmeet™s family did not think that the work Jaspreetdid within the house was real work. This feeling isnot unique to their families. Across the world, themain responsibility for housework and care-givingcare-givingcare-givingcare-givingcare-givingtasks, like looking after the family, especially
children, the elderly and sick members, lies withwomen. Yet, as we have seen, the work that womendo within the home is not recognised as work. It isalso assumed that this is something that comesnaturally to women. It, therefore, does not have tobe paid for. And society devaluesdevaluesdevaluesdevaluesdevalues this work.  49Melani with her daughter.Were Harmeet and Shonali correctin saying that Harmeet™s motherdid not work?What do you think would happenif your mother or those involvedin doing the work at home wenton a strike for a day?Why do you think that men andboys generally do not dohousework? Do you think theyshould?Lives of domestic workersLives of domestic workersLives of domestic workersLives of domestic workersLives of domestic workersIn the story above, Harmeet™s mother was not theonly one who did the housework. A lot of the workwas done by Mangala, their domestic helper.Many homes, particularly in towns and cities,employ domestic workers. They do a lot of work Œsweeping and cleaning, washing clothes anddishes, cooking, looking after young children orthe elderly. Most domestic workers are women.Sometimes, even young boys or girls are employedto do this work. Wages are low, as domestic workdoes not have much value. A domestic worker™sday can begin as early as five in the morning andend as late as twelve at night! Despite the hardwork they do, their employers often do not showthem much respect. This is what Melani, adomestic worker had to say about her experienceof working in Delhi Œ ﬁMy first job was with a richfamily that lived in a three-storeyed house. Thememsahib was very strange as she would shoutto get any work done. My work was in the kitchen.There were two other girls who did the cleaning.Our day would begin at 5 o™clock. For breakfastwe would get a cup of tea and two dry rotis. Wecould never get a third roti. In the evening, whenI cooked the food, the two other girls would begme to give them an extra roti. I would secretlygive it to them and make an extra one for myself.We were so hungry after working through the day!We could not wear chappals in the house. In thewinter, our feet would swell up with the cold. Iused to feel scared of the memsahib but also feltangry and humiliated. Did we not work all day?Did we not deserve to be treated with somerespect?ﬂIn fact, what we commonly term as houseworkactually involves many different tasks. A numberof these tasks require heavy physical work. Inboth rural and urban areas women and girls haveto fetch water. In rural areas women and girlscarry heavy headloads of firewood. Tasks likeChapter 4: Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls Growing up as Boys and Girls  