UnderstandingAdvertisingToday we are surrounded by advertisements orads as we call them. We watch these ontelevision, listen to them on radio, see them onthe streets and in newspapers and magazines.Even taxis and rickshaws carry advertisementson them. When we go to cinemas, we seeadvertisements before the film begins and onthe Internet, they often pop-up when we go intodifferent websites. What do advertisements do?How do they attract our attention? Read more tofind out–7CHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTER  Top Taste DaalCare Soap
What are the advertisements selling?
How do they describe the product?

What is the text trying to say?Guests should be served this.
What do the pictures convey?Love of a mother.
Would you want to buy these products
after seeing the advertisement?
Look at the two advertisementsabove and fill the table.Do you think there is a problem inusing the image of the mother asthe only person who takes care ofthe child in the Care Soapadvertisement?Advertisements draw our attention to variousproductsproductsproductsproductsproducts and describe them positively so that webecome interested in buying them. In this chapter,we will focus on the two advertisements that you seeabove to understand what advertising does and howit works.Building brands and brand valuesBuilding brands and brand valuesBuilding brands and brand valuesBuilding brands and brand valuesBuilding brands and brand valuesHave you ever heard of the word brandbrandbrandbrandbrand? Advertisingis all about building brands. At a very basic level,‚branding™ means stamping a product with aparticular name or sign. This is done in order todifferentiate it from other products in the market.So, let us     look again at the advertisements above.Why do you think the manufacturers of the soap
and the daal gave their products a specific name?Chapter 7: Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising81  82Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeBranding actually came from cattlegrazing.  Cattle of different ownersgrazed together in ranches and they oftengot mixed up. The owners thought of asolution. They started marking theircattle with the owner™s sign by using aheated iron. This was called ‚branding™.Daals or pulses are usually sold loose in themarket. We usually know daals by their differenttypes like masoor ki daal, urad ki daal, etc. Thesenames are not brand names. When a company takesmasoor ki daal and puts it into a packet, it will needto give the daal a special name. It needs to do this sothat we don™t confuse the daal in that particularpacket with the daal that is sold loose. They decideon a name like ‚Top Taste Daal™. This naming of theproduct is called ‚branding™.Similarly, in the case of the soap, there are manysoaps in the market today. In bigger towns and cities,
we no longer just say soap but rather refer to themusing the different names of companies that makethem. Given the many soaps in the market, thecompany will have to give the soap a different andspecial name. By doing this they create anotherbrand of soap.Just naming the product may not make us buy it.The manufacturers that made the soap and the daal
still have to convince us that their soap and daal arebetter than the others available in the market. Thisis where advertising comes in. It plays a crucial rolein trying to convince us to buy the product that isadvertised.The task of creating a brand does not stop at givingthe product a special name. For example, just when
‚Top Taste Daal™ begins to be sold, another companydecides to also sell daals in a packet and calls this‚Best Taste Daal™. So, now there are two brandeddaals in the market. Both the companies are keenthat you buy their daals.The consumerconsumerconsumerconsumerconsumer is confused because you reallycannot tell the difference between ‚Top Taste Daal™
and ‚Best Taste Daal™. The manufacturer has to givethe consumer a reason to prefer a particular brandof daal. Just naming a daal does not help sell it. So,advertisers begin claiming certain special values fortheir brand. In this way, they try to differentiate it  83Manufacturers spend crores of rupeesto make sure that we see theiradvertisements wherever we go.from other similar products. Look below at how thetwo daals try and do this.From the advertisements, you can now see thatthe two daals are saying different things. ‚Top Taste
Daal™ is appealing to our social tradition of treatingguests extremely well. ‚Best Taste Daal™ is appealingto our concern for our children™s health and thatthey eat things that are good for them. Values suchas treating our guests well and making sure ourchildren get nutritious food are used by brands tocreate brand values. These brand values areconveyed through the use of visuals and words togive us an overall image that appeals to us.Brand values and social valuesBrand values and social valuesBrand values and social valuesBrand values and social valuesBrand values and social values Advertisements are an important part of our socialand cultural life today. We watch advertisements,discuss them and often judge people according tothe brand products they use. Given thatadvertisements are such a powerful source ofinfluence in our lives, we need to be able tounderstand the ways in which they work.Chapter 7: Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising  84Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeWhat does this advertisementwant me to feel when I use thisbrand?Who is this advertisement talkingto and who is it leaving out?If you have money to buy theseproducts, how would you feelwhen you see theseadvertisements? If you do nothave money, then how would youfeel?Let us look more closely at the two advertisementsthat we began the chapter with. If we ask all of thequestions listed, we will realise the way in whichthese two advertisements work.Branded daals cost much more than daals thatare sold loose because they include the costs ofpackaging and advertising. So, many people cannotafford them. However, because of the advertisement,people who cannot afford Top Taste Daal might beginto feel that they are not treating their guests properly.Gradually, people will come to believe that onlybranded daals are good and will want to buy thedaal that comes in a sealed packet rather than thatwhich is sold loose. But, in reality there is littledifference between daals that are sold loose and thosesold in a packet. We are just made to imagine thedifference because of the advertisement.In the Care Soap advertisement, once again apersonal emotion is being used. As a mother, if you
want to show your child you care, then you have tobuy this expensive soap. The advertisement uses themother™s concern for her child. It tells the motherthat her love and care is best shown through usingthis particular brand of soap. Because of this,mothers begin to feel that using this soap is a signof how much they love their child. In this way, theadvertisement uses the love of a mother for her childto sell this expensive soap. Mothers who cannotafford this soap might begin to feel that they are notgiving their children the best care.As you can see with the two advertisements, theyoften target our personal emotions. By linking our
personal emotions to products, advertisements tendto influence the ways in which we value ourselvesas persons.Often several of our cricket heroes and ourfavourite film stars also try and sell products to us
through advertisements. We may feel tempted to buythese products because persons whom we consider  85This collage,prepared by schoolchildren, showscelebritiespromotingproducts.It was recentlyreported that a topcricketer  signed athree-year contractto do variousadvertisements forRs 180 crores.A popular modelmay chargeRs 5 lakh or moreper advertisement.The telecast rate for a 30 secondadvertisement on a major TV channel isRs 1.65 lakh.The cost of bringing out a
quarter page colour advertisement in aleading newspaper is Rs 8.36 lakh.our heroes tell us that they are worth buying. Inaddition, advertisements often show us images ofthe lifestyleslifestyleslifestyleslifestyleslifestyles of rich people and seldom show us thereality of peoples™ lives that we see around us.Advertisements play a big role in our lives. We notonly buy products based on them, but often, havingcertain brand products influences the ways in whichwe think about ourselves, our friends and our family.It is, therefore, important to know how advertisingworks and understand what it does before we chooseto buy the products that advertisements sell. We needto be able to critically understand why they useparticular images, the personal emotion that theyare appealing to and the ways in which this affectshow we think about ourselves when we use theproduct or are not able to buy it.Chapter 7: Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising  THE LOVING SOAP
As you know, our company has a strong
presence in all the metros and major
cities. We would like to introduce our
new freshness soap as a very special
soap in the market, and aim to capture
a large number of customers within thefirst six months of its release!
We need an advertising campaign that will
create a new interest amongst consumers
who are already used to many brands.
Sir, our first task as an advertising agency
is to determine the consumer profile for
your soap, that is, identify the typical
user of such a high quality soap. We will
conduct market surveys to get a better
idea of this. Then we will visualise a
campaign that will appeal to our specific
Target Audience.
Excellent! Then please
bring in the best market
research professionals for
the job.At the office of aprominent advertising agency...
How does an advertisement get made?How does an advertisement get made?How does an advertisement get made?How does an advertisement get made?How does an advertisement get made?Advertising is a very important part of getting peopleto buy a brand. This does not happen easily andseveral hundred books have been written on this.Advertisements aim to get people to buy a particularbrand. This basically means that after we see anadvertisement we should want to buy the brand. Letus see how the persons who make advertisements
decide on what images, text and personal emotionsto use to sell the product.  A couple of weeks later...
The creative team at the agency starts thinking...
Market surveys have revealed that young
mothers between the ages of 21 and 40 are
concerned about the soap they use for their
children, and are willing to pay a higher price
for a better product. We should create a brand
identity that appeals to them.
Hmm...good idea.
Once the marketing strategy is considered successful, the advertisement
campaign is finalised and released in various media along with the launch of the new care soap.
The  agency makes a
presentation to the client...
I like the concept!
Our campaign will be based on the concept:‚Care Soap Œ Express Your Love Afresh™. The
visuals will focus on mothers and children to
re-inforce our brand strategy!
The visuals and advertisements are
then tested amongst the target audience.
Yes. I think this promotes a
new way of expressing love
and care. I would like to try
this new brand.How about
Care Soap?
Yes, that™s a
brilliant idea!All the existing brands ofbaby soap in the market
emphasise ‚naturalness™, etc.
We need a different angle.
How about associating our soap with
the loving care of the mother! We
should say that you cannot fully
express your love for your child
without your soap!
We need a
good brand
name to go
with that.Thank youMadam!  88Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial advertisements refer to advertisements made by the State or private agencies
that have a larger message for society.  The following are two social advertisements:
Social advertising
Socialadvertisementregardingeducationalrights ofdisabledchildren.Socialadvertisementregardingcrossing ofunmannedrailwaycrossings.Who do you think is the targetaudience for the socialadvertisements below?What is the message that eachsocial advertisement is trying toget across?Having read about diarhhoeaepidemic in the chapter on StateGovernment, can you make asocial advertisement on whatprecautionary steps should betaken to prevent diarrhoea?Advertising and democracyAdvertising and democracyAdvertising and democracyAdvertising and democracyAdvertising and democracyThere are various ways in which advertising links toissues of equality in a democratic society.Advertising a product costs a lot of money. Usually,crores of rupees are spent advertising a brand.
Producing and showing advertisements in the mediais very expensive. Because there are so manyadvertisements in the market today, companies haveto show the advertisement again and again to haveit stick in people™s minds.What this often means is that only large companiescan advertise. If you own a small business, you will
not have the money to show your product on TV ornational newspapers and magazines. So, personswho sell papad, pickles, sweets and jams that theyhave made at home are not considered as fashionableas brand products. They often have to sell their  89Advertising makes us believe that thingsthat are packaged are better than thingsthat do not come in packets.products in weekly markets and neighbourhoodshops that you will read about in the following unit.It also makes us believe that things that arepackaged and have a brand name are far better than
things that do not come in packets. We forget thatthe quality of a product has little to do with thepackaging that it comes in. This shift to packagedproducts negatively affects the sales of several smallbusinesses forcing people out of their livelihoods.In a democracy in which all people are equal andshould be able to lead a life of dignity, advertisingtends to promote a certain lack of respect for thepoor. They are not the faces we most often see inadvertisements and so we tend to dismiss their livesas worthless.Advertising, because it appeals to personalemotions also tends to make people who cannot
afford certain brands feel bad. They feel that theyare unable to give their loved ones the best care thatbrand products appear to offer.Chapter 7: Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising  90Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeJuice sellers like this one are losingcustomers who, because of advertising,prefer branded drinks.Advertising by focusing on the lives of the rich andfamous helps us forget about issues of poverty,discrimination and dignity, all of which are centralto the functioning of equality in a democracy. Morethan just selling us products, advertisements tell ushow we should live our lives, what we should aspireand dream for, how we should express our love, whatit means to be smart, successful and beautiful. Ascitizens of a democratic society, it is important forus to be aware of the strong influence that advertisinghas on our lives. By critically understanding whatadvertisements do, we can make better decisionsabout whether we wish to buy a product or not.  91EXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISES1.What do you understand by the word brand? List two
reasons why building brands is central to advertising?2.Choose two of your favourite print advertisements. Now,
look at each of these and answer the following questions:a.What visuals and text is being used in these
advertisements to attract my attention?b.What values are being promoted in these
advertisements?c.Who is this advertisement speaking to and who is it
leaving out?d.If you could not afford the brand that is being
advertised how would you feel?3.Can you explain two ways in which you think advertising
affects issues of equality in a democracy?4.Making an advertisement requires a lot of creativity. Let
us imagine a situation in which a manufacturer has justmade a new watch. She says that she wants to sell thiswatch to school children. She comes to your class andasks you all to create a brand name as well as anadvertisement for the watch. Divide the class into smallgroups and each group create an advertisement for thiswatch. Share it with the class.GlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGlossaryProduct: This refers to a thing or service that has been made for being sold in the market.Consumer: This refers to the person for whom the goods or products have been made and whopays money to buy and use them.Brand: This refers to a special identification or name that is associated with a product. Suchidentification is created through the process of advertising.
To influence: This refers to the power to change what someone believes or does.Lifestyle:  In this chapter, this word refers to people™s lives being identified by the products theyown, the clothes they wear, the places they eat in, etc.Chapter 7: Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising Understanding Advertising  