A Shirt inthe MarketThis chapter tells us the storyof a shirt ! It begins with theproduction of cotton and endswith the sale of the shirt. Weshall see that a chain ofmarkets links the producer ofcotton to the buyer of theshirt in the supermarket.Buying and selling takes placeat every step in the chain.Does everyone benefit equallyfrom this? Or do some peoplebenefit more than others? Weshall find out.9CHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTER  Did Swapna get a fair price on thecotton?Why did the trader pay Swapnaa low price?Where do you think large farmerswould sell their cotton? How istheir situation different fromSwapna?A cotton farmer in KurnoolA cotton farmer in KurnoolA cotton farmer in KurnoolA cotton farmer in KurnoolA cotton farmer in KurnoolSwapna, a small farmer in Kurnool (Andhra Pradesh)grows cotton on her small piece of land. The bolls ofthe cotton plant are ripe and some have alreadyburst, so Swapna is busy picking cotton. The bolls,which carry the cotton in them, do not burst openall at once so it takes several days to harvest thecotton.Once the cotton is collected, instead of selling it atKurnool cotton market, Swapna and her husband
take the harvest to the local trader. At the beginningof the cropping season, Swapna had borrowedRs 2,500 from the trader at a very high interest rateto buy seeds, fertilisers, pesticides for cultivation.At that time, the local trader made Swapna agree toanother condition. He made her promise to sell allher cotton to him.Cultivation of cotton requires high levels of inputssuch as fertilisers and pesticides and the farmers
have to incur heavy expenses on account of these.Most often, the small farmers need to borrow moneyto meet these expenses.At the trader™s yard, two of his men weigh thebags of cotton. At a price of Rs 1,500 per quintal,
the cotton fetches Rs 6,000. The trader deductsRs 3,000 for repayment of loan and interest and paysSwapna Rs 3,000.Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna: Rs 3,000 only!Trader:Trader:Trader:Trader:Trader: Cotton is 
selling cheap. There is a lot of cottonin the market.Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna: I have toiled so hard for four months to
grow this cotton. You can see how fine and clean thecotton is this time. I had hoped to get a much betterprice.2. Ginning millbuys the cotton.1. Trader sells the

cotton at the Kurnool
cotton market.
3. Ginning mill removes
the seeds and presses

the cotton into bales.4. Spinningmill buysthe bales.6. Spinningmill sells theyarn to yarn

dealers.5. Spinning
mill spins the
cotton into
yarn.
Chapter 9: A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market105  106Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeA shop in Erode.Trader:Trader:Trader:Trader:Trader: Amma, I am giving you a good price. Othertraders are not even paying this much. You can checkat the Kurnool market, if you do not believe me.Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna:Swapna: Don™t be angry. How 
can I doubt you? Ihad only hoped that we would earn enough from thecotton crop to last us a few months.Though Swapna knows that cotton will sell for atleast Rs 1,800 per quintal, she doesn™t argue further.
The trader is a powerful man in the village and thefarmers have to depend on him for loans not only forcultivation, but also to meet other exigencies suchas illnesses, children™s school fees. Also, there aretimes in the year when there is no work and noincome for the farmers, so borrowing money is theonly means of survival.Swapna™s earning from cotton cultivation is barelymore than what she might have earned as a wage
labourer.The cloth market of ErodeThe cloth market of ErodeThe cloth market of ErodeThe cloth market of ErodeThe cloth market of ErodeErode™s bi-weekly cloth market in Tamil Nadu is oneof the largest cloth markets in the world. A largevariety of cloth is sold in this market. Cloth that ismade by weavers in the villages around is alsobrought here for sale. Around the market are officesof cloth merchants who buy this cloth. Other tradersfrom many south Indian towns also come andpurchase cloth in this market. On market days, you would also find weaversbringing cloth that has been made on order from themerchant. These merchants supply cloth on orderto garment manufacturers and exporters around thecountry. They purchase the yarn and giveinstructions to the weavers about the kind of cloththat is to be made. In the following example, we cansee how this is done.  1071.This is a merchant™s shop in the bazaar.Over the years, these traders havedeveloped extensive contacts withgarment firms around the country fromwhom they get orders. These traderspurchase the yarn (thread) from others.2. The weavers live in villages aroundand take the yarn supplied by thesetraders to their homes where the loomsare located in sheds adjacent to theirhouses. This photograph shows apowerloom in one such home.The weavers and their families spendlong hours working on these looms.Most weaving units have about  2Œ8
powerlooms on which the yarn is woveninto cloth. A variety of sarees, towels,shirting, ladies dress material andbedsheets are produced in these looms.3. They then bring back the finished clothto the traders. Here, they can be seengetting ready to go to the merchant in thetown. The trader keeps an account of theyarn given and pays them money forweaving this into cloth.111112222233333What are the following peopledoing at the Erode cloth marketŒ
merchants, weavers, exporters?In what ways are weaversdependent on cloth merchants?Putting-out systePutting-out systePutting-out systePutting-out systePutting-out systemmmmmŒŒŒŒŒ     weavers producingweavers producingweavers producingweavers producingweavers producingcloth at homecloth at homecloth at homecloth at homecloth at homeThe merchant distributes work among the weaversbased on the orders he has received for cloth. Theweavers get the yarn from the merchant and supplyhim the cloth. For the weavers, this arrangementseemingly has two advantages. The weavers do nothave to spend their money on purchase of yarn. Also,the problem of selling the finished cloth is taken careof. Weavers know from the outset what cloth theyshould make and how much of it is to be woven.However, this dependence on the merchants bothfor raw materials and markets means that themerchants have a lot of power. They give orders forwhat is to be made and they pay a very low price formaking the cloth. The weavers have no way ofChapter 9: A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market  108Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeWeaver™s cooperativeWeaver™s cooperativeWeaver™s cooperativeWeaver™s cooperativeWeaver™s cooperativeWe have seen that the weavers are paid very little by the
merchant under the putting out system. Weaver™s cooperatives
are one way to reduce the dependence on the merchant and to
earn a higher income for the weavers.  In a cooperative, people
with common interests come together and work for their mutual
benefit. In a weaver™s cooperative, the weavers form a group and
take up certain activities collectively. They procure yarn from
the yarn dealer and distribute it among the weavers. The
cooperative also does the marketing. So, the role of the merchant
is reduced, and weavers get a fair price on the cloth.
At times, the government helps the cooperatives by buying cloth from them at a reasonable
price. For instance, the Tamil Nadu government runs a Free School Uniform programme in
the state. The government procures the cloth for this programme from the powerloom weaver™s
cooperatives.  Similarly, the government buys cloth from the handloom weaver™s cooperatives
and sells it through stores known as Co-optex. You might have come across one of these
stores in your town.
If the weavers were to buy yarn ontheir own and sell cloth, theywould probably earn three timesmore. Do you think this ispossible? How? Discuss.Do you find similar ‚putting-out™arrangements in making papads,masalas, beedis? Find out aboutthis in your area and discuss inclass.You might have heard ofcooperatives in your area. It couldbe in milk, provisions, paddy, etc.Find out for whose benefit theywere set up?knowing who they are making the cloth for or at whatprice it will be sold. At the cloth market, themerchants sell the cloth to the garment factories. Inthis way, the market works more in favour of themerchants.Weavers invest all their savings or borrow moneyat high interest rates to buy looms. Each loom costs
Rs 20,000, so a small weaver with two looms has toinvest Rs 40,000. The work on these looms cannotbe done alone. The weaver and another adult memberof his family work upto 12 hours a day to producecloth. For all this work, they earn aboutRs 3,500 per month.The arrangement between the merchant and theweavers is an example of putting-out system,putting-out system,putting-out system,putting-out system,putting-out system,whereby the merchant supplies the raw material andreceives the finished product. It is prevalent in theweaving industry in most regions of India.  109What are the demands foreignbuyers make on the garmentexporters? Why do the garmentexporters agree to thesedemands?How do the garment exportersmeet the conditions set by theforeign buyers?The garment exporting factory near DelhiThe garment exporting factory near DelhiThe garment exporting factory near DelhiThe garment exporting factory near DelhiThe garment exporting factory near DelhiThe Erode merchant supplies the cotton clothproduced by the weavers to a garment exportingfactory near Delhi. The garment exporting factorywill use the cloth to make shirts. The shirts will beexported to foreign buyers. Among the foreign buyersare businesspersons from the US and Europe whorun a chain of stores. These large stores do businessstrictly on their own terms. They demand the lowestprices from the supplier. In addition, they set highstandards for quality of production and timelydelivery. Any defects or delay in delivery is dealt withstrictly. So, the exporterexporterexporterexporterexporter tries 
his best to meet theconditions set by these powerful buyers.Faced with such pressures from the buyers, thegarment exporting factories, in turn, try to cut costs.They get the maximum work out of the workers atthe lowest possible wages. This way they canmaximise their own profits and also supply thegarments to foreign buyers at a cheap price.Women workers sewing buttons in agarment factory.Chapter 9: A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market  110Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifePayment to workers (per month)
Tailoring.......................................................
Rs 3,000Ironing..........................................................Rs 1.50 (per piece)
Checking......................................................Rs 2,000

Thread cutting
and buttoning.............................................Rs 1,500
Write a letter to the Ministerasking for what you think wouldbe proper payment to the workers.The Impex garment factory has 70 workers. Mostof them are women. Most of these workers areemployed on a temporary basis. This means thatwhenever the employer feels that a worker is notneeded, the worker can be asked to leave. Workers™wages are fixed according to their skills. The highestpaid among the workers are the tailors who get aboutRs 3,000 per month. Women are employed as helpersfor thread cutting, buttoning, ironing and packaging.These jobs have the lowest wages.The shirt in the United StatesThe shirt in the United StatesThe shirt in the United StatesThe shirt in the United StatesThe shirt in the United StatesA number of shirts are on display at a large clothesshop in the United States, and are priced at $26.That is, each shirt sells for $26 or around Rs 1,200.Use the diagram shown in the margin to fillin the blanks below.The businessperson purchased the shirts fromthe garment exporter in Delhi for Rs _______ per shirt.He then spent Rs _______ for advertising in the media,and another Rs _______ per shirt on storage, displayand all other charges. Thus, the cost to this personis Rs 600 while he sells the shirt for Rs 1,200. Rs__________ is his profit on one shirt! If he is able tosell a large number of shirts, his profit will be higher.The garment exporter sold the shirt at Rs 200 perpiece. The cloth and other raw materials cost himRs 70 per shirt. The workers™ wages cost anotherWhy do you think more women areemployed in the Impex garmentfactory? Discuss.PurchaseRs 200Storage, etc.Rs 100Advertising
Rs 300Profit
Rs 600The shirt below shows the profitmade by the businessperson, andthe various costs that he had topay. Find out from the diagrambelow, what the cost priceincludes.  111Compare the earnings per shirt ofthe worker in the garment factory,the garment exporter and thebusinessperson in the marketabroad. What do you find?What are the reasons that thebusinessperson is able to make ahuge profit in the market?You have read the chapter onadvertising. Why does thebusinessperson spend Rs 300 pershirt on advertising? Discuss.People who gained in the market
People who didn™t gain
as much in the market
1.________________________
2.________________________
3.________________________
1.________________________
2.________________________
3.________________________
Rs 15 per shirt. The cost of running his office cameto Rs 15 per shirt. Can you calculate the profit pershirt for the garment exporter?Who are the gainers in the market?Who are the gainers in the market?Who are the gainers in the market?Who are the gainers in the market?Who are the gainers in the market?A chain of markets links the producer of cotton tothe buyer at the supermarket. Buying and sellingtakes place at every step in the chain. Let us recallwho were the people who were involved in thisprocess of buying and selling. Did they all gain asmuch? There were people who made profits in themarket and there were some who did not gain asmuch from this buying and selling. Despite theirhaving toiled very hard, they earned little. Can youplace them in the table shown here?Market and equalityMarket and equalityMarket and equalityMarket and equalityMarket and equalityThe foreign businessperson made huge profitsprofitsprofitsprofitsprofits in the
market. Compared to this, the garment exportermade only moderate profits. On the other hand, theearnings of the workers at the garment export factoryare barely enough to cover their day-to-day needs.
Similarly, we saw the small cotton farmer and the
weaver at Erode put in long hours of hard work. But
they did not get a fair price in the market for what
they produced. The merchants or traders aresomewhere in between. Compared to the weavers,they have earned more but it is still much less than
the exporter. Thus, not everyone gains equally in
the market. Democracy is also about getting a fairwage in the market.     Whether it is Kanta or Swapna,
if families don™t earn enough how would they thinkof themselves as equal to others?On one hand, the market offers peopleopportunities for work and to be able to sell thingsthat they grow or produce. It could be the farmerselling cotton or the weaver producing cloth. On theother hand, it is usually the rich and the powerfulChapter 9: A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market  112Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeDid you know that the readymade clothesthat you buy require the work of so manydifferent persons?that get the maximum earnings from the market.These are the people who have money and own thefactories, the large shops, large land holdings, etc.The poor have to depend on the rich and the powerfulfor various things. They have to depend for loans (asin the case of Swapna, the small farmer), for rawmaterials and marketing of their goods (weavers inthe putting out system), and most often foremployment (workers at the garment factory).Because of this dependence, the poor are exploitedin the market. There are ways to overcome these suchas forming cooperatives of producers and ensuringthat laws are followed strictly. In the last chapter,we will read about how one such fish-workers™cooperative was started on the Tawa river.  113EXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISESEXERCISES1.What made Swapna sell the cotton to the trader instead
of selling at the Kurnool cotton market?2.Describe the conditions of employment  as well as the
wages of workers in the garment exporting factory. Doyou think the workers get a fair deal?3.Think of something common that we use. It could be
sugar, tea, milk, pen, paper, pencil, etc. Discuss throughwhat chain of markets this reaches you. Can you think ofthe people that help in the production or trade?4.Arrange the statements given alongside in the correct
order and then fill in the numbers in the cotton bollsaccordingly. The first two have already been done for you.131. Swapna sells the cotton to the trader.2. Customers buy these shirts in asupermarket.3. Trader sells cotton to the Ginning Mill.4. Garment exporters buy the cloth frommerchants for making shirts.5. Yarn dealers or merchants give theyarn to the weavers.6. The exporter sells shirts to thebusinessperson from the USA.7.Spinning mill buys the cotton and sellsyarn to the yarn dealers.8.Weavers return with the cloth.9. Ginning mill cleans the cotton andmakes it into bales.GlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGinning mill: A factory where seeds are removed from cotton bolls. The cotton is pressed intobales to be sent for spinning into thread.Exporter: A person who sells goods abroad.Profit: The amount that is left or gained from earnings after deducting all the costs. If the costs aremore than the earnings, it would lead to a loss.Chapter 9: A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market A Shirt in the Market  