92UNITFIVE  93MarketsTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteTeacher™s noteThese two chapters focus on aspects oflife and commercial cycles associated withmarkets. While some of these processesmay be visible     and, therefore, easily
observable, there are also others that are
relatively unfamiliar.Chapter 8 discusses ‚Markets AroundUs™. At one level, we study different market
sites: a weekly market, neighbourhoodshops, a shopping complex, etc. At anotherlevel, we explore the intricate question,‚how do goods reach these markets?™ Weexamine how a chain of markets operatesand the role of wholesale markets withinthis, through the case study of a wholesalevegetable market. We usually associate‚market™ with marketplaces, but buying andselling takes place in diverse     ways and the
chapter discusses how all of this falls
within a larger understanding of markets.Chapter 9 looks at how markets offerpeople different opportunities. This is done
through the ‚story of a shirt™, and the chainof markets involved     in the process.
Together with understanding each step ofthe manufacture and circulation of a shirt,we realise that some people stand to gainin the market transaction whereas othersdo not gain as much, or none at all. Theopportunities are highly unequal. Ways doexist, such as those of cooperativemarketing, which can provide a betterreturn to the producers. However, we needto find many more viable avenues forequitable distribution.These chapters offer an opportunity ofbringing in the experience of local marketsfor discussion in the classroom. A visit toa wholesale market would be of interest,and would allow the learner to find out theprofit margins and details of daily earningsso that those inequalities can be directlyexamined. The experiences of markets arevaried and also quite rich. Hence, oneshould allocate time for some questions,not addressed in the text, which studentsmay wish to discuss.93  Markets Around UsWe go to the market to buy many things Œ vegetables, soap, toothpaste, masala,bread, rice, dal, clothes, notebooks, biscuits, etc. If we make a list of the goodsthat we purchase, it would be really long. There are many kinds of markets thatwe may visit for our everyday needs: these can include shops, hawker™s stalls inour neighbourhood, a weekly market, a large shopping complex, perhaps even amall. In this chapter, we look at some of these markets and try to understandhow the goods that are sold there reach buyers, who these buyers are, who thesesellers are, and the sorts of problems they face.8CHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTERCHAPTER  95  96Social and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeSocial and Political LifeWhy do people go to a weeklymarket? Give three reasons.Who are the sellers in a weeklymarket? Why don™t we find bigbusiness persons in thesemarkets?Why are things cheap in theweekly market?Explain with an example howpeople bargain in the market. Canyou think of a situation where thebargain would be unfair?Sameer is a small trader in the weekly
market. He buys clothes from a large
trader in the town and sells them in six
different markets in a week. He and

other cloth sellers move in groups. They
hire a mini van for this. His customers
are from villages that are near the
marketplace. At festival times, such as
during Deepavali or Pongal, he does
good business.
Sameer: Seller of clothes
Weekly marketWeekly marketWeekly marketWeekly marketWeekly marketA weekly market is so called because it is held on aspecific day of the week. Weekly markets do not havepermanent shops. Traders set up shops for the dayand then close them up in the evening.  Then theymay set up at a different place the next day. Thereare thousands of such markets in India. People comehere for their everyday requirements.Many things in weekly markets are available atcheaper rates. This is because when shops are in
permanent buildings, they incur a lot of expenditureŒ they have to pay rent, electricity, fees to thegovernment. They also have to pay wages to theirworkers. In weekly markets, these shop owners storethe things they sell at home. Most of them are helpedby their family members and, hence, do not need tohire workers. Weekly markets also have a largenumber of shops selling the same goods which meansthere is competition among them. If some trader wereto charge a high price, people would move to anothershop where the same thing may be available morecheaply or where the buyer can bargain and bringthe price down.One of the advantages of weekly markets is thatmost things you need are available at one place.
Whether you want vegetables, groceries or clothitems, utensils Œ all of them can be found here. Youdo not have to go to different areas to buy differentthings. People also prefer going to a market wherethey have a choice and a variety of goods.Shops in the neighbourhoodShops in the neighbourhoodShops in the neighbourhoodShops in the neighbourhoodShops in the neighbourhoodWe have seen that the weekly markets offer a varietyof goods. However, we also buy things from otherkinds of markets. There are many shops that sellgoods and services in our neighbourhoods. We maybuy milk from the dairy, groceries from departmentalstores, stationery, eatables or medicines from other  97Sujata and Kavita were sent to buy
groceries from their neighbourhood
shop. This was the shop they usually
went to. It was crowded today. The
shop owner managed the shopherself with two helpers. When they
managed to get into the shop, Sujata
dictated a list to her. She in turn
began asking her helpers to weigh
and pack the items. MeanwhileKavita looked around–
On the top left shelf there were
different brands of detergent cakes.
Another shelf had toothpastes,talcum powder, shampoo, hair oil.
The different brands and different
colours looked so attractive.  On the
floor lay a few sacks.
It took almost 20 minutes to weigh
and pack all the groceries.  Then
Sujata showed her ﬁnotebook.ﬂ  The
woman noted the amount of
Rs.1550 in the notebook and gave
it back.  She also noted the amountin her big register.  Then Sujata took the heavy bags out of the shop.  Her family will pay for the
purchases in the first week of next month.
Why did Sujata carry a notebook?Do you think this system isuseful? Can there be problems?What are the different kinds ofshops that you find in yourneighbourhood? What do youpurchase from them?Why are goods sold in permanentshops costlier than those sold inthe weekly markets or by roadsidehawkers?Chapter 8: Markets Around Us Markets Around Us Markets Around Us Markets Around Us Markets Around Usshops. Many of these are permanent shops, whileothers are roadside stalls such as that of thevegetable hawker, the fruit vendor, the mechanic,etc.Shops in the neighbourhood are useful in manyways.  They are near our home and we can go thereon any day of the week.  Usually, the buyer and sellerknow each other and these shops also provide goodson credit. This means that you can pay for thepurchases later, as we saw in Sujata™s case, forexample.  