290BIOLOGYAnimals accumulate ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, waterand ions like Na+, K+, ClŒ, phosphate, sulphate, etc., either by metabolicactivities or by other means like excess ingestion. These substances haveto be removed totally or partially. In this chapter, you will learn themechanisms of elimination of these substances with special emphasis oncommon nitrogenous wastes. Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major
forms of nitrogenous wastes excreted by the animals. Ammonia is themost toxic form and requires large amount of water for its elimination,whereas uric acid, being the least toxic, can be removed with a minimum
loss of water.The process of excreting ammonia is Ammonotelism. Many bony fishes,aquatic amphibians and aquatic insects are ammonotelic in nature.Ammonia, as it is readily soluble, is generally excreted by diffusion across
body surfaces or through gill surfaces (in fish) as ammonium ions. Kidneysdo not play any significant role in its removal. Terrestrial adaptationnecessitated the production of lesser toxic nitrogenous wastes like urea
and uric acid for conservation of water. Mammals, many terrestrialamphibians and marine fishes mainly excrete urea and are called ureotelicanimals. Ammonia produced by metabolism is converted into urea in theliver of these animals and released into the blood which is filtered and
excreted out by the kidneys. Some amount of urea may be retained in thekidney matrix of some of these animals to maintain a desired osmolarity.Reptiles, birds, land snails and insects excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric
acid in the form of pellet or paste with a minimum loss of water and are
called uricotelic animals.EXCRETORY PRODUCTS ANDTHEIR ELIMINATIONCHAPTER  1919.1Human
Excretory
System19.2Urine Formation19.3Function of the
Tubules19.4Mechanism of
Concentration of
the Filtrate19.5Regulation of
Kidney Function19.6Micturition19.7Role of other
Organs in
Excretion19.8Disorders of the
Excretory
System
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION291A survey of animal kingdom presents a variety of excretory structures.In most of the invertebrates, these structures  are simple tubular formswhereas vertebrates have complex tubular organs called kidneys. Someof these structures are mentioned here. Protonephridia or flame cells arethe excretory structures in Platyhelminthes (Flatworms, e.g., Planaria),rotifers, some annelids and the cephalochordate Œ Amphioxus.Protonephridia are primarily concerned with ionic and fluid volume
regulation, i.e., osmoregulation. Nephridia are the tubular excretorystructures of earthworms and other annelids. Nephridia help to removenitrogenous wastes and maintain a fluid and ionic balance. Malpighiantubules are the excretory structures of most of the insects includingcockroaches. Malpighian tubules help in the removal of nitrogenouswastes and osmoregulation. Antennal glands or green glands performthe excretory function in crustaceans like prawns.19.1 HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEMIn humans, the excretory system consistsof a pair of kidneys, one pair of ureters, aurinary bladder and a urethra (Figure19.1). Kidneys are reddish brown, beanshaped structures situated between thelevels of last thoracic and third lumbarvertebra close to the dorsal inner wall ofthe abdominal cavity. Each kidney of anadult human measures 10-12 cm inlength, 5-7 cm in width, 2-3 cm inthickness with an average weight of 120-170 g. Towards the centre of the innerconcave surface of the kidney is a notchcalled hilum through which ureter, bloodvessels and nerves enter. Inner to the hilumis a broad funnel shaped space called therenal pelvis with projections called calyces.The outer layer of kidney is a toughcapsule. Inside the kidney, there are twozones, an outer cortex and an innermedulla. The medulla is divided into a fewconical masses (medullary pyramids)projecting into the calyces (sing.: calyx).The cortex extends in between theFigure 19.1 Human Urinary system
292BIOLOGYFigure 19.3A diagrammatic representation of a nephron showing blood vessels,duct and tubulemedullary pyramids as renal columns calledColumns of Bertini (Figure 19.2).Each kidney has nearly one millioncomplex tubular structures called nephrons(Figure 19.3), which are the functional units.Each nephron has two parts Œ the
glomerulus and the renal tubule.
Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed by
the afferent arteriole Œ a fine branch of renal
artery. Blood from the glomerulus is carried
away by an efferent arteriole.The renal tubule begins with a doublewalled cup-like structure called Bowman™scapsule, which encloses the glomerulus.Glomerulus alongwith Bowman™s capsule, is
called the malpighian body or renalcorpuscle (Figure 19.4). The tubulecontinues further to form a highly coiled
network Œ proximal convoluted tubuleFigure 19.2Longitudinal section (Diagrammatic)of Kidney
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION293(PCT). A hairpin shaped Henle™s loop is thenext part of the tubule which has adescending and an ascending limb. The
ascending limb continues as another highly
coiled tubular region called distalconvoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of manynephrons open into a straight tube called
collecting duct, many of which converge andopen into the renal pelvis through medullary
pyramids in the calyces.The Malpighian corpuscle, PCT and DCTof the nephron are situated in the corticalregion of the kidney whereas the loop of Henledips into the medulla. In majority ofnephrons, the loop of Henle is too short andextends only very little into the medulla. Suchnephrons are called cortical nephrons. Insome of the nephrons, the loop of Henle isvery long and runs deep into the medulla.These nephrons are called juxta medullarynephrons.The efferent arteriole emerging from the glomerulus forms a finecapillary network around the renal tubule called the peritubularcapillaries. A minute vessel of this network runs parallel to the Henle™sloop forming a ‚U™ shaped vasa recta.  Vasa recta is absent or highlyreduced in cortical nephrons.19.2URINE FORMATIONUrine formation involves three main processes namely, glomerularfiltration, reabsorption and secretion, that takes place in different parts ofthe nephron.The first step in urine formation is the filtration of blood, which is carriedout by the glomerulus and is called glomerular filtration. On an average,1100-1200 ml of blood is filtered by the kidneys per minute which constituteroughly 1/5th of the blood pumped out by each ventricle of the heart in aminute. The glomerular capillary blood pressure causes filtration of bloodthrough 3 layers, i.e., the endothelium of glomerular blood vessels, theepithelium of Bowman™s capsule and a basement membrane between these
two layers. The epithelial cells of Bowman™s capsule called podocytes arearranged in an intricate manner so as to leave some minute spaces calledfiltration slits or slit pores. Blood is filtered so finely through thesemembranes, that almost all the constituents of the plasma except the
proteins pass onto the lumen of the Bowman™s capsule. Therefore, it isconsidered as a process of ultra filtration.Afferent arteriole
EfferentarterioleBowman™scapsuleProximalconvoluted tubuleFigure 19.4Malpighian body (renal corpuscle)
294BIOLOGYThe amount of the filtrate formed by the kidneys per minute is calledglomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR in a healthy individual isapproximately 125 ml/minute, i.e., 180 litres per day !The kidneys have built-in mechanisms for the regulation of glomerularfiltration rate. One such efficient mechanism is carried out by juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA). JGA is a special sensitive region formed bycellular modifications in the distal convoluted tubule and the afferentarteriole at the location of their contact. A fall in GFR can activate the JGcells to release renin which can stimulate the glomerular blood flow andthereby the GFR back to normal.A comparison of the volume of the filtrate formed per day (180 litresper day) with that of the urine released (1.5 litres), suggest that nearly 99per cent of the filtrate has to be reabsorbed by the renal tubules. Thisprocess is called reabsorption. The tubular epithelial cells in differentsegments of nephron perform this either by active or passive mechanisms.
For example, substances like glucose, amino acids, Na+, etc., in the filtrateare reabsorbed actively whereas the nitrogenous wastes are absorbed by
passive transport. Reabsorption of water also occurs passively in the initialsegments of the nephron (Figure 19.5).During urine formation, the tubular cells secrete substances like H+,K+ and ammonia into the filtrate. Tubular secretion is also an importantstep in urine formation as it helps in the maintenance of ionic and acid
base balance of body fluids.19.3FUNCTION OF THE TUBULESProximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT): PCT is lined by simple cuboidalbrush border epithelium which increases the surface area for reabsorption.Nearly all of the essential nutrients, and 70-80 per cent of electrolytesand water are reabsorbed by this segment. PCT also helps to maintainthe pH and ionic balance of the body fluids by selective secretion ofhydrogen ions, ammonia and potassium ions into the filtrate and byabsorption of HCO3Œ from it.Henle™s Loop: Reabsorption is minimum in its ascending limb.However, this region plays a significant role in the maintenance of highosmolarity of medullary interstitial fluid. The descending limb of loop ofHenle is permeable to water but almost impermeable to electrolytes. Thisconcentrates the filtrate as it moves down. The ascending limb isimpermeable to water but allows transport of electrolytes actively orpassively. Therefore, as the concentrated filtrate pass upward, it getsdiluted due to the passage of electrolytes to the medullary fluid.Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT): Conditional reabsorption of Na+and water takes place in this segment. DCT is also capable of reabsorptionof HCO3Œ and selective secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions andNH3 to maintain the pH and sodium-potassium balance in blood.
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION295Collecting Duct: This long duct extends from the cortex of the kidneyto the inner parts of the medulla. Large amounts of water could bereabsorbed from this region to produce a concentrated urine. This segment
allows passage of small amounts of urea into the medullary interstitium
to keep up the osmolarity. It also plays a role in the maintenance of pH
and ionic balance of blood by the selective secretion of H+ and K+ ions(Figure 19.5).19.4MECHANISM OF CONCENTRATION OF THE FILTRATEMammals have the ability to produce a concentrated urine. The Henle™sloop and vasa recta play a significant role in this. The flow of filtrate inthe two limbs of Henle™s loop is in opposite directions and thus forms a
counter current. The flow of blood through the two limbs of vasa recta isFigure 19.5Reabsorption and secretion of major substances at different parts ofthe nephron (Arrows indicate direction of movement of materials.)
296BIOLOGYalso in a counter current pattern. The proximity between the Henle™s loopand vasa recta, as well as the counter current in them help in maintainingan increasing osmolarity towards the inner medullary interstitium, i.e.,
from 300 mOsmolLŒ1 in the cortex to about 1200 mOsmolLŒ1 in the innermedulla. This gradient is mainly caused by NaCl and urea. NaCl is
transported by the ascending limb of Henle™s loop which is exchanged
with the descending limb of vasa recta. NaCl is returned to the interstitiumby the ascending portion of vasa recta. Similarly, small amounts of ureaenter the thin segment of the ascending limb of Henle™s loop which is
transported back to the interstitium by the collecting tubule. The above
described transport of substances facilitated by the special arrangement
of Henle™s loop and vasa recta is called the counter current mechanism(Figure. 19.6). This mechanism helps to maintain a concentration gradientFigure 19.6 Diagrammatic representation of a nephron and vasa recta showingcounter current mechanisms
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION297in the medullary interstitium. Presence of such interstitial gradient helpsin an easy passage of water from the collecting tubule thereby
concentrating the filtrate (urine). Human kidneys can produce urine nearly
four times concentrated than the initial filtrate formed.19.5REGULATION OF KIDNEY FUNCTIONThe functioning of the kidneys is efficiently monitored and regulated byhormonal feedback mechanisms involving the hypothalamus, JGA and
to a certain extent, the heart.Osmoreceptors in the body are activated by changes in blood volume,body fluid volume and ionic concentration. An excessive loss of fluid from
the body can activate these receptors which stimulate the hypothalamus
to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin from theneurohypophysis. ADH facilitates water reabsorption from latter parts of
the tubule, thereby preventing diuresis. An increase in body fluid volume
can switch off the osmoreceptors and suppress the ADH release to complete
the feedback. ADH can also affect the kidney function by its constrictory
effects on blood vessels. This causes an increase in blood pressure. An
increase in blood pressure can increase the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR.The JGA plays a complex regulatory role. A fall in glomerular bloodflow/glomerular blood pressure/GFR can activate the JG cells to release
renin which converts angiotensinogen in blood to angiotensin I andfurther to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II, being a powerful
vasoconstrictor, increases the glomerular blood pressure and thereby
GFR. Angiotensin II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
Aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na+ and water fromthe distal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood
pressure and GFR. This complex mechanism is generally known as
the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism.An increase in blood flow to the atria of the heart can cause the releaseof Atrial Natriuretic Factor (ANF). ANF can cause vasodilation (dilation ofblood vessels) and thereby decrease the blood pressure. ANF mechanism,
therefore, acts as a check on the renin-angiotensin mechanism.19.6MICTURITIONUrine formed by the nephrons is ultimately carried to the urinary bladderwhere it is stored till a voluntary signal is given by the central nervous
system (CNS). This signal is initiated by the stretching of the urinary bladder
as it gets filled with urine. In response, the stretch receptors on the walls
of the bladder send signals to the CNS. The CNS passes on motor messages
298BIOLOGYto initiate the contraction of smooth muscles of the bladder andsimultaneous relaxation of the urethral sphincter causing the release of
urine. The process of release of urine is called micturition and the neuralmechanisms causing it is called the micturition reflex. An adult human
excretes, on an average, 1 to 1.5 litres of urine per day. The urine formedis a light yellow coloured watery fluid which is slightly acidic (pH-6.0)
and has a characterestic odour. On an average, 25-30 gm of urea is
excreted out per day. Various conditions can affect the characteristics of
urine. Analysis of urine helps in clinical diagnosis of many metabolic
discorders as well as malfunctioning of the kidney. For example, presence
of glucose (Glycosuria) and ketone bodies (Ketonuria) in urine are
indicative of diabetes mellitus.19.7ROLE OF OTHER ORGANS IN EXCRETIONOther than the kidneys, lungs, liver and skin also help in the elimination
of excretory wastes.Our lungs remove large amounts of CO2 (approximately 200mL/minute) and also significant quantities of water every day. Liver, the largest
gland in our body, secretes bile-containing substances like bilirubin,
biliverdin, cholesterol, degraded steroid hormones, vitamins and drugs.
Most of these substances ultimately pass out alongwith digestive wastes.The sweat and sebaceous glands in the skin can eliminate certainsubstances through their secretions. Sweat produced by the sweat
glands is a watery fluid containing NaCl, small amounts of urea, lactic
acid, etc. Though the primary function of sweat is to facilitate a cooling
effect on the body surface, it also helps in the removal of some of thewastes mentioned above. Sebaceous glands eliminate certain
substances like sterols, hydrocarbons and waxes through sebum. This
secretion provides a protective oily covering for the skin. Do you knowthat small amounts of nitrogenous wastes could be eliminated through
saliva too?19.8DISORDERS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEMMalfunctioning of kidneys can lead to accumulation of urea in blood,a condition called uremia, which is highly harmful and may lead tokidney failure. In such patients, urea can be removed by a process
called hemodialysis. Blood drained from a convenient artery ispumped into a dialysing unit after adding an anticoagulant like heparin.
The unit contains a coiled cellophane tube surrounded by a fluid
(dialysing fluid) having the same composition as that of plasma except
the nitrogenous wastes. The porous cellophane membrance of the tube
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION299SUMMARYMany nitrogen containing substances, ions, CO2, water, etc., that accumulate inthe body have to be eliminated. Nature of nitrogenous wastes formed and theirexcretion vary among animals, mainly depending on the habitat (availability of
water). Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major nitrogenous wastes excreted.Protonephridia, nephridia, malpighian tubules, green glands and the kidneysare the common excretory organs in animals. They not only eliminate nitrogenous
wastes but also help in the maintenance of ionic and acid-base balance of body
fluids.In humans, the excretory system consists of one pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters,a urinary bladder and a urethra. Each kidney has over a million tubular structures
called nephrons. Nephron is the functional unit of kidney and has two portions Œ
glomerulus and renal tubule. Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed from afferent
arterioles, fine branches of renal artery. The renal tubule starts with a double walled
Bowman™s capsule and is further differentiated into a proximal convoluted tubule
(PCT), Henle™s loop (HL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
nephrons join to a common collecting duct many of which ultimately open into the
renal pelvis through the medullary pyramids. The Bowman™s capsule encloses the
glomerulus to form Malpighian or renal corpuscle.Urine formation involves three main processes, i.e., filtration, reabsorption andsecretion. Filtration is a non-selective process performed by the glomerulus using
the glomerular capillary blood pressure. About 1200 ml of blood is filtered by theallows the passage of molecules based on concentration gradient. As
nitrogenous wastes are absent in the dialysing fluid, these substances
freely move out, thereby clearing the blood. The cleared blood is
pumped back to the body through a vein after adding anti-heparin toit. This method is a boon for thousands of uremic patients all over the
world.Kidney transplantation is the ultimate method in the correction ofacute renal failures (kidney failure). A functioning kidney is used intransplantation from a donor, preferably a close relative, to minimise its
chances of rejection by the immune system of the host. Modern clinical
procedures have increased the success rate of such a complicated
technique.Renal calculi: Stone or insoluble mass of crystallised salts (oxalates,etc.) formed within the kidney.Glomerulonephritis: Inflammation of glomeruli of kidney.
300BIOLOGYglomerulus per minute to form 125 ml of filtrate in the Bowman™s capsule perminute (GFR). JGA, a specialised portion of the nephrons, plays a significant role
in the regulation of GFR. Nearly 99 per cent reabsorption of the filtrate takes place
through different parts of the nephrons. PCT is the major site of reabsorption and
selective secretion. HL primarily helps to maintain osmolar gradient
(300 mOsmolLŒ1 -1200 mOsmolLŒ1) within the kidney interstitium. DCT andcollecting duct allow extensive reabsorption of water and certain electrolytes, which
help in osmoregulation: H+, K+ and NH3 could be secreted into the filtrate by thetubules to maintain the ionic balance and pH of body fluids.A counter current mechanism operates between the two limbs of the loop ofHenle and those of vasa recta (capillary parallel to Henle™s loop). The filtrate getsconcentrated as it moves down the descending limb but is diluted by the ascending
limb. Electrolytes and urea are retained in the interstitium by this arrangement.
DCT and collecting duct concentrate the filtrate about four times, i.e., from 300
mOsmolLŒ1 to 1200 mOsmolLŒ1, an excellent mechanism of conservation of water.Urine is stored in the urinary bladder till a voluntary signal from CNS carries out
its release through urethra, i.e., micturition. Skin, lungs and liver also assist in
excretion.EXERCISES1.Define Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)2.Explain the autoregulatory mechanism of GFR.3.Indicate whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) Micturition is carried out by a reflex.
(b) ADH helps in water elimination, making the urine hypotonic.
(c) Protein-free fluid is filtered from blood plasma into the Bowman™s capsule.
(d) Henle™s loop plays an important role in concentrating the urine.
(e) Glucose is actively reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.4.Give a brief account of the counter current mechanism.5.Describe the role of liver, lungs and skin in excretion.6.Explain micturition.7.Match the items of column I with those of column II :Column IColumn II(a)Ammonotelism(i)Birds(b)Bowman™s capsule(ii)Water reabsorption(c)Micturition(iii)Bony fish(d)Uricotelism(iv)Urinary bladder(d)ADH(v)Renal tubule
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION3018.What is meant by the term osmoregulation?9.Terrestrial animals are generally either ureotelic or uricotelic, not ammonotelic,why ?10.What is the significance of juxta glomerular apparatus (JGA) in kidney function?11.Name the following:
(a)A chordate animal having flame cells as excretory structures(b)Cortical portions projecting between the medullary  pyramids in the human
kidney(c)A loop of capillary running parallel to the Henle™s loop.12.Fill in the gaps :
(a)Ascending limb of Henle™s loop is _______ to water whereas the descending
limb is _______  to it.(b)Reabsorption of water from distal parts of the tubules is facilitated by hormone
_______.(c)Dialysis fluid contain all the constituents as in plasma except _______.(d)A healthy adult human excretes (on an average) _______ gm of urea/day.
