Biology is the science of life forms and living processes. The living worldcomprises an amazing diversity of living organisms. Early man couldeasily perceive the difference between inanimate matter and living
organisms. Early man deified some of the inanimate matter (wind, sea,fire etc.) and some among the animals and plants. A common feature ofall such forms of inanimate and animate objects was the sense of awe
or fear that they evoked. The description of living organisms includinghuman beings began much later in human history. Societies whichindulged in anthropocentric view of biology could register limited
progress in biological knowledge. Systematic and monumentaldescription of life forms brought in, out of necessity, detailed systemsof identification, nomenclature and classification. The biggest spin off
of such studies was the recognition of the sharing of similarities amongliving organisms both horizontally and vertically. That all present dayliving organisms are related to each other and also to all organisms
that ever lived on this earth, was a revelation which humbled man andled to cultural movements for conservation of biodiversity. In thefollowing chapters of this unit, you will get a description, including
classification, of animals and plants from a taxonomist™s perspective.DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLDChapter 1The Living WorldChapter 2Biological ClassificationChapter 3Plant KingdomChapter 4Animal KingdomUNIT 1
Born on 5 July 1904, in Kempten, Germany, ERNST MAYR, theHarvard University evolutionary biologist who has been called‚The Darwin of the 20th century™, was one of the 100 greatestscientists of all time. Mayr joined Harvard™s Faculty of Arts
and Sciences in 1953 and retired in 1975, assuming the title
Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology Emeritus. Throughout
his nearly 80-year career, his research spanned ornithology,
taxonomy, zoogeography, evolution, systematics, and the
history and philosophy of biology. He almost single-handedly
made the origin of species diversity the central question of
evolutionary biology that it is today. He also pioneered the
currently accepted definition of a biological species. Mayr was
awarded the three prizes widely regarded as the triple crown ofbiology: the Balzan Prize in 1983, the International Prize forBiology in 1994, and the Crafoord Prize in 1999. Mayr died atthe age of 100 in the year 2004.Ernst Mayr(1904 Œ 2004)
How wonderful is the living world ! The wide range of living types isamazing. The extraordinary habitats in which we find living organisms,be it cold mountains, deciduous forests, oceans, fresh water lakes, desertsor hot springs, leave us speechless. The beauty of a galloping horse, of
the migrating birds, the valley of flowers or the attacking shark evokesawe and a deep sense of wonder. The ecological conflict and cooperationamong members of a population and among populations of a community
or even the molecular traffic inside a cell make us deeply reflect on Œ whatindeed is life? This question has two implicit questions within it. The firstis a technical one and seeks answer to what living is as opposed to the
non-living, and the second is a philosophical one, and seeks answer towhat the purpose of life is. As scientists, we shall not attempt answeringthe second question. We will try to reflect on Œ what is living?1.1WHAT IS ‚LIVING™?When we try to define ‚living™, we conventionally look for distinctivecharacteristics exhibited by living organisms. Growth, reproduction, ability
to sense environment and mount a suitable response come to our mindimmediately as unique features of living organisms. One can add a fewmore features like metabolism, ability to self-replicate, self-organise,
interact and emergence to this list. Let us try to understand each of these.All living organisms grow. Increase in mass and increase in numberof individuals are twin characteristics of growth. A multicellular organismTHE LIVING WORLDCHAPTER  11.1What is ‚Living™?1.2Diversity in theLiving World1.3TaxonomicCategories1.4TaxonomicalAids
4BIOLOGYgrows by cell division. In plants, this growth by cell division occurscontinuously throughout their life span. In animals, this growth is seenonly up to a certain age. However, cell division occurs in certain tissues to
replace lost cells. Unicellular organisms grow by cell division. One can
easily observe this in in vitro cultures by simply counting the number ofcells under the microscope. In majority of higher animals and plants,
growth and reproduction are mutually exclusive events. One must
remember that increase in body mass is considered as growth. Non-living
objects also grow if we take increase in body mass as a criterion for growth.
Mountains, boulders and sand mounds do grow. However, this kind of
growth exhibited by non-living objects is by accumulation of material on
the surface. In living organisms, growth is from inside. Growth, therefore,
cannot be taken as a defining property of living organisms. Conditions
under which it can be observed in all living organisms have to be explained
and then we understand that it is a characteristic of living systems. A
dead organism does not grow.Reproduction, likewise, is a characteristic of living organisms.In multicellular organisms, reproduction refers to the production of
progeny possessing features more or less similar to those of parents.
Invariably and implicitly we refer to sexual reproduction. Organisms
reproduce by asexual means also. Fungi multiply and spread easily due
to the millions of asexual spores they produce. In lower organisms like
yeast and hydra, we observe budding. In Planaria (flat worms), we observetrue regeneration, i.e., a fragmented organism regenerates the lost part of
its body and becomes, a new organism. The fungi, the filamentous algae,
the protonema of mosses, all easily multiply by fragmentation. When it
comes to unicellular organisms like bacteria, unicellular algae or Amoeba,reproduction is synonymous with growth, i.e., increase in number of cells.
We have already defined growth as equivalent to increase in cell number
or mass. Hence, we notice that in single-celled organisms, we are not very
clear about the usage of these two terms Œ growth and reproduction.
Further, there are many organisms which do not reproduce (mules, sterile
worker bees, infertile human couples, etc). Hence, reproduction also cannot
be an all-inclusive defining characteristic of living organisms. Of course,
no non-living object is capable of reproducing or replicating by itself.Another characteristic of life is metabolism. All living organismsare made of chemicals. These chemicals, small and big, belonging to
various classes, sizes, functions, etc., are constantly being made and
changed into some other biomolecules. These conversions are chemical
reactions or metabolic reactions. There are thousands of metabolic
reactions occurring simultaneously inside all living organisms, be they
THE LIVING WORLD5unicellular or multicellular. All plants, animals, fungi and microbes exhibitmetabolism. The sum total of all the chemical reactions occurring in ourbody is metabolism. No non-living object exhibits metabolism. Metabolicreactions can be demonstrated outside the body in cell-free systems. An
isolated metabolic reaction(s) outside the body of an organism, performedin a test tube is neither living nor non-living. Hence, while metabolism isa defining feature of all living organisms without exception, isolated
metabolic reactions in vitro are not living things but surely living reactions.Hence, cellular organisation of the body is the defining feature of
life forms.Perhaps, the most obvious and technically complicated feature of allliving organisms is this ability to sense their surroundings or environment
and respond to these environmental stimuli which could be physical,
chemical or biological. We sense our environment through our senseorgans. Plants respond to external factors like light, water,  temperature,other organisms, pollutants, etc. All organisms, from the prokaryotes to
the most complex eukaryotes can sense and respond to environmentalcues. Photoperiod affects reproduction in seasonal breeders, both plantsand animals. All organisms handle chemicals entering their bodies. All
organisms therefore, are ‚aware™ of their surroundings. Human being isthe only organism who is aware of himself, i.e., has self-consciousness.Consciousness therefore, becomes the defining property of living
organisms.When it comes to human beings, it is all the more difficult to definethe living state. We observe patients lying in coma in hospitals virtually
supported by machines which replace heart and lungs. The patient isotherwise brain-dead. The patient has no self-consciousness. Are suchpatients who never come back to normal life, living or non-living?In higher classes, you will come to know that all living phenomenaare due to underlying interactions. Properties of tissues are not present
in the constituent cells but arise as a result of interactions among the
constituent cells. Similarly, properties of cellular organelles are not presentin the molecular constituents of the organelle but arise as a result ofinteractions among the molecular components comprising the organelle.
These interactions result in emergent properties at a higher level oforganisation. This phenomenon is true in the hierarchy of organisationalcomplexity at all levels. Therefore, we can say that living organisms are
self-replicating, evolving and self-regulating interactive systems capableof responding to external stimuli. Biology is the story of life on earth.Biology is the story of evolution of living organisms on earth. All living
organisms Œ present, past and future, are linked to one another by thesharing of the common genetic material, but to varying degrees.
6BIOLOGY1.2DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLDIf you look around you will see a large variety of living organisms, be itpotted plants, insects, birds, your pets or other animals and plants. Thereare also several organisms that you cannot see with your naked eye but
they are all around you. If you were to increase the area that you makeobservations in, the range and variety of organisms that you see wouldincrease. Obviously, if you were to visit a dense forest, you would probably
see a much greater number and kinds of living organisms in it. Eachdifferent kind of plant, animal or organism that you see, represents aspecies. The number of species that are known and described range
between 1.7-1.8 million. This refers to biodiversity or the number andtypes of organisms present on earth. We should remember here that as
we explore new areas, and even old ones, new organisms are continuously
being identified.As stated earlier, there are millions of plants and animals in the world;we know the plants and animals in our own area by their local names.
These local names would vary from place to place, even within a country.Probably you would recognise the confusion that would be created if wedid not find ways and means to talk to each other, to refer to organisms
we are talking about.Hence, there is a need to standardise the naming of living organismssuch that a particular organism is known by the same name all over the
world. This process is called nomenclature. Obviously, nomenclature ornaming is only possible when the organism is described correctly and we
know to what organism the name is attached to. This is identification.In order to facilitate the study, number of scientists have establishedprocedures to assign a scientific name to each known organism.  This is
acceptable to biologists all over the world. For plants, scientific names are
based on agreed principles and criteria, which are provided in InternationalCode for Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN). You may ask, how  are animalsnamed? Animal taxonomists have evolved International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature (ICZN). The scientific names ensure that each organismhas only one name. Description of any organism should enable the people(in any part of the world) to arrive at the same name. They also ensure
that such a name has not been used for any other known organism.Biologists follow universally accepted principles to provide scientificnames to known organisms.  Each name has two components Œ the
Generic name and the specific epithet. This system of providing a namewith two components is called Binomial nomenclature. This namingsystem given by Carolus Linnaeus is being practised by biologists all
over the world. This naming system using a two word format was foundconvenient. Let us take the example of mango to understand the way of
THE LIVING WORLD7providing scientific names better. The scientific name of mango is writtenas Mangifera indica. Let us see how it is a binomial name.  In this nameMangifera represents the genus while indica, is a particular species, or aspecific epithet. Other universal rules of nomenclature are as follows:1.Biological names are generally in Latin and written in italics.They are Latinised or derived from Latin irrespective of theirorigin.2.The first word in a biological name represents the genus whilethe second component denotes the specific epithet.3.Both the words in a biological name, when handwritten, areseparately underlined, or printed in italics to indicate their Latinorigin.4.The first word denoting the genus starts with a capital letterwhile the specific epithet starts with a small letter. It can beillustrated with the example of Mangifera indica.Name of the author appears after the specific epithet, i.e., at the end ofthe biological name and is written in an abbreviated form, e.g., Mangiferaindica Linn. It indicates that this species was first described by Linnaeus.Since it is nearly impossible to study all the living organisms, it isnecessary to devise some means to make this possible. This process is
classification. Classification is the process by which anything is groupedinto convenient categories based on some easily observable characters.For example, we easily recognise groups such as plants or animals ordogs, cats or insects. The moment we use any of these terms, we associatecertain characters with the organism in that group. What image do you
see when you think of a dog ? Obviously, each one of us will see ‚dogs™and not ‚cats™. Now, if we were to think of ‚Alsatians™ we know what we aretalking about. Similarly, suppose we were to say ‚mammals™, you would,
of course, think of animals with external ears and body hair. Likewise, inplants, if we try to talk of ‚Wheat™, the picture in each of our minds will beof wheat plants, not of rice or any other plant. Hence, all these - ‚Dogs™,
‚Cats™, ‚Mammals™, ‚Wheat™, ‚Rice™, ‚Plants™, ‚Animals™, etc., are convenientcategories we use to study organisms. The scientific term for thesecategories is taxa. Here you must recognise that taxa can indicatecategories at very different levels. ‚Plants™ Œ also form a taxa. ‚Wheat™ isalso a taxa. Similarly, ‚animals™, ‚mammals™, ‚dogs™ are all taxa Œ but youknow that a dog is a mammal and mammals are animals. Therefore,
‚animals™, ‚mammals™ and ‚dogs™ represent taxa at different levels.Hence, based on characteristics, all living organisms can be classifiedinto different taxa. This process of classification is taxonomy. Externaland internal structure, along with the structure of cell, development
8BIOLOGYprocess and ecological information of organisms are essential and formthe basis of modern taxonomic studies.Hence, characterisation, identification, classification and nomenclatureare the processes that are basic to taxonomy.Taxonomy is not something new. Human beings have always beeninterested in knowing more and more about the various kinds of
organisms, particularly with reference to their own use. In early days,
human beings needed to find sources for their basic needs of food, clothingand shelter. Hence, the earliest classifications were based on the ‚uses™ ofvarious organisms.Human beings were, since long, not only interested in knowing moreabout different kinds of organisms and their diversities, but also the
relationships among them.  This branch of study was referred to as
systematics.  The word systematics is derived from the Latin word‚systema™ which means systematic arrangement of organisms.  Linnaeus
used Systema Naturae as the  title of his publication.  The scope ofsystematics was later enlarged to include identification, nomenclatureand classification. Systematics takes into account evolutionaryrelationships between organisms.1.3TAXONOMIC CATEGORIESClassification is not a single step process but involves hierarchy of stepsin which each step represents a rank or category.  Since the category is a
part of overall taxonomic arrangement, it is called the taxonomic categoryand all categories together constitute the taxonomic hierarchy.  Eachcategory, referred to as a unit of classification, in fact, represents a rankand is commonly termed as taxon (pl.: taxa).Taxonomic categories and hierarchy can be illustrated by an example.Insects represent a group of organisms sharing common features likethree pairs of jointed legs.  It means insects are recognisable concreteobjects which can be classified, and thus were given a rank or category.Can you name other such groups of organisms? Remember, groups
represent category.  Category further denotes rank.  Each rank or taxon,in fact, represents a unit of classification. These taxonomic groups/
categories are distinct biological entities and not merely morphological
aggregates.Taxonomical studies of all known organisms have led to thedevelopment of common categories such as kingdom, phylum or division
(for plants), class, order, family, genus and species. All organisms,including those in the plant and animal kingdoms have species as thelowest category. Now the question you may ask is, how to place an
THE LIVING WORLD9organism in various categories? The basic requirement is the knowledgeof characters of an individual or group of organisms.  This helps inidentifying similarities and dissimilarities among the individuals of thesame kind of organisms as well as of other kinds of organisms.1.3.1SpeciesTaxonomic studies consider a group of individual organisms withfundamental similarities as a species.  One should be able to distinguishone species from the other closely related species based on the distinct
morphological differences. Let us consider Mangifera indica, Solanumtuberosum (potato) and Panthera leo (lion). All the three names, indica,tuberosum and leo, represent the specific epithets,  while the first wordsMangifera, Solanum and Panthera are genera and represents anotherhigher level of taxon or category. Each genus may have one or more thanone specific epithets representing different organisms, but havingmorphological similarities.  For example,  Panthera has another specificepithet called tigris and Solanum includes species like nigrum andmelongena. Human beings belong to the species sapiens  which isgrouped in the genus Homo. The scientific name thus, for human being,is written as Homo sapiens.1.3.2Genus
Genus comprises a group of related species which has more charactersin common in comparison to species of other genera. We can say thatgenera are aggregates of closely related species. For example, potato andbrinjal are two different species but both belong to the genus Solanum.Lion (Panthera leo), leopard (P. pardus) and tiger (P. tigris) with severalcommon features, are all species of the genus Panthera. This genus differsfrom another genus Felis which includes cats.1.3.3FamilyThe next category, Family, has a group of related genera with still less
number of similarities as compared to genus and species.   Families arecharacterised on the basis of both vegetative and reproductive features ofplant species. Among plants for example, three different genera Solanum,Petunia and Datura are placed in the family Solanaceae. Among animalsfor example, genus Panthera, comprising lion, tiger, leopard is put alongwith genus, Felis (cats) in the family Felidae. Similarly, if you observe thefeatures of a cat and a dog, you will find some similarities and  somedifferences as well. They are separated into two different families Œ Felidaeand Canidae, respectively.
10BIOLOGY1.3.4Order
You have seen earlier that categories like species, genus andfamilies are based on a number of similar characters.   Generally,order and other higher taxonomic categories are identified based
on the aggregates of characters.  Order being a higher category,is the assemblage of families which exhibit a few similarcharacters.  The similar characters are less in number as
compared to different genera included in a family.  Plant familieslike Convolvulaceae, Solanaceae are included in the orderPolymoniales mainly based on the floral characters. The animal
order, Carnivora, includes families like Felidae and Canidae.1.3.5ClassThis category includes related orders. For example, order Primatacomprising monkey, gorilla and gibbon is placed in classMammalia along with order Carnivora that includes animals liketiger, cat and dog. Class Mammalia has other orders also.1.3.6PhylumClasses comprising animals like fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birdsalong with mammals constitute the next higher category called
Phylum. All these, based on the common features like presenceof notochord and dorsal hollow neural system, are included inphylum Chordata.  In case of plants,  classes with a few similar
characters are assigned to a higher category called Division.1.3.7KingdomAll animals belonging to various phyla are assigned to thehighest category called Kingdom Animalia in the classificationsystem of animals. The Kingdom Plantae, on the other hand, isdistinct, and comprises all plants from various divisions.Henceforth, we will refer to these two groups as animal andplant kingdoms.The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom have beenshown in ascending order starting with species in Figure 1.1.These are broad categories.  However, taxonomists have alsodeveloped sub-categories in this hierarchy to facilitate more
sound and scientific placement of various taxa.Look at the hierarchy in Figure 1.1. Can you recall the basisof arrangement? Say, for example, as we go higher from species
to kingdom, the number of common characteristics goes onFigure 1.1Taxonomiccategories
showing
hierarchial
arrangement
in ascending
order
THE LIVING WORLD111.4TAXONOMICAL AIDSTaxonomic studies of various species of plants, animals and otherorganisms are useful in agriculture, forestry, industry and in general inknowing our bio-resources and their diversity. These studies wouldrequire correct classification and identification of organisms. Identification
of organisms requires intensive laboratory and field studies. The collectionof actual specimens of plant and animal species is essential and is theprime source of taxonomic studies. These are also fundamental to studies
and essential for training in systematics. It is used for classification of anorganism, and the information gathered is also stored along with thespecimens. In some cases the specimen is preserved for future studies.Biologists have established certain procedures and techniques to storeand preserve the information as well as the specimens.  Some of these are
explained to help you understand the usage of these aids.1.4.1HerbariumHerbarium is a store house of collected plant specimens that are dried,pressed and preserved on sheets. Further, these sheets are arrangeddecreasing. Lower the taxa, more are the characteristics that the memberswithin the taxon share. Higher the category, greater is the difficulty ofdetermining the relationship to other taxa at the same level. Hence, theproblem of classification becomes more complex.Table 1.1 indicates the taxonomic categories to which some commonorganisms like housefly, man, mango and wheat belong.CommonBiologicalGenusFamilyOrderClassPhylum/Name NameDivisionManHomo sapiensHomoHominidaePrimataMammaliaChordataHouseflyMuscaMusca
MuscidaeDipteraInsectaArthropodadomesticaMangoMangiferaMangiferaAnacardiaceaeSapindalesDicotyledonaeAngiospermaeindicaWheatTriticumTriticum
PoaceaePoalesMonocotyledonaeAngiospermaeaestivumTABLE 1.1  Organisms with their Taxonomic Categories
12BIOLOGYaccording to a universally accepted system of classification. Thesespecimens, along with their descriptions on herbarium sheets, become astore house or repository for future use (Figure 1.2). The herbarium sheets
also carry a label providing information about date and place of collection,English, local and botanical names, family, collector™s name, etc. Herbariaalso serve as quick referral systems in taxonomical studies.1.4.2Botanical GardensThese specialised gardens have collections of living plants for reference.Plant species in these gardens are grown for identification purposes and
each plant is labelled indicating its botanical/scientific name and its family.
The famous botanical gardens are at Kew (England), Indian Botanical
Garden, Howrah (India) and at National Botanical Research Institute,Lucknow (India).1.4.3MuseumBiological museums are generally set up in educational institutes suchas schools and colleges. Museums have collections of  preserved plant
and animal specimens for study and reference.  Specimens are preserved
in the containers or jars in preservative solutions. Plant and animal
specimens may also be preserved as dry specimens. Insects are preservedin insect boxes after collecting, killing and pinning. Larger animals likebirds and mammals are usually stuffed and preserved. Museums oftenhave collections of skeletons of animals too.Figure 1.2  Herbarium showing stored specimens
THE LIVING WORLD131.4.4Zoological ParksThese are the places where wild animals are kept in protected environmentsunder human care and which enable us to learn about their food habits
and behaviour. All animals in a zoo are provided, as far as possible, theconditions similar to their natural habitats. Children love visiting theseparks, commonly called Zoos (Figure 1.3).Figure 1.3 Pictures showing animals in different zoological parks of India1.4.5KeyKey is another taxonomical aid used for identification of plants and animalsbased on the similarities and dissimilarities. The keys are based on the
contrasting characters generally in a pair called couplet.  It representsthe choice made between two opposite options. This results in acceptanceof only one and rejection of the other. Each statement in the key is called
a lead.  Separate taxonomic keys are required for each taxonomic categorysuch as family, genus and species for identification purposes. Keys aregenerally analytical in nature.
14BIOLOGYSUMMARYThe living world is rich in variety. Millions of plants and animals have beenidentified and described but a large number still remains unknown. The veryrange of organisms in terms of size, colour, habitat, physiological andmorphological features make us seek the defining characteristics of living
organisms. In order to facilitate the study of kinds and diversity of organisms,
biologists have evolved certain rules and principles for identification, nomenclature
and classification of organisms. The branch of knowledge dealing with these aspects
is referred to as taxonomy. The taxonomic studies of various species of plantsand animals are useful in agriculture, forestry, industry and in general for knowingour bio-resources and their diversity. The basics of taxonomy like identification,
naming and classification of organisms are universally evolved under international
codes. Based on the resemblances and distinct differences, each organism is
identified and assigned a correct scientific/biological name comprising two words
as per the binomial system of nomenclature. An organism represents/occupies aplace or position in the system of classification. There are many categories/ranksand are generally referred to as taxonomic categories or taxa. All the categories
constitute a taxonomic hierarchy.Taxonomists have developed a variety of taxonomic aids to facilitateidentification, naming and classification of organisms.  These studies are carried
out from the actual specimens which are collected from the field and preserved asreferrals in the form of herbaria, museums and in botanical gardens and zoologicalparks. It requires special techniques for collection and preservation of specimens
in herbaria and museums. Live specimens, on the other hand, of plants and
animals, are found in botanical gardens or in zoological parks. Taxonomists also
prepare and disseminate information through manuals and monographs for
further taxonomic studies. Taxonomic keys are tools that help in identificationbased on characteristics.Flora, manuals, monographs and catalogues are some other meansof recording descriptions. They also help in correct identification. Floracontains the actual account of habitat and distribution of plants of agiven area. These provide the index to the plant species found in a
particular area. Manuals are useful in providing information foridentification of names of species found in an area. Monographs containinformation on any one taxon.
THE LIVING WORLD15EXERCISES1.Why are living organisms classified?2.Why are the classification systems changing every now and then?3.What different criteria would you choose to classify people that you meet often?4.What do we learn from identification of individuals and populations?5.Given below is the scientific name of Mango.  Identify the correctly written name.Mangifera Indica
Mangifera indica6.Define a taxon. Give some examples of taxa at different hierarchical levels.7.Can  you identify the correct sequence of taxonomical categories?
(a)SpeciesOrderPhylumKingdom(b)GenusSpeciesOrderKingdom(c)SpeciesGenusOrderPhylum8.Try to collect all the currently accepted meanings for the word ‚species™. Discusswith your teacher the meaning of species in case of higher plants and animalson one hand, and bacteria on the other hand.9.Define and understand the following terms:(i) Phylum  (ii) Class  (iii) Family  (iv) Order  (v) Genus10.How is a key helpful in the identification and classification of an organism?11.Illustrate the taxonomical hierarchy with suitable examples of a plant and ananimal.
