NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION315As you know, the functions of the organs/organ systems in our bodymust be coordinated to maintain homeostasis. Coordination is theprocess through which two or more organs interact and complement the
functions of one another. For example, when we do physical exercises,the energy demand is increased for maintaining an increased muscularactivity. The supply of oxygen is also increased. The increased supply ofoxygen necessitates an increase in the rate of respiration, heart beat andincreased blood flow via blood vessels. When physical exercise is stopped,the activities of nerves, lungs, heart and kidney gradually return to theirnormal conditions. Thus, the functions of muscles, lungs, heart, bloodvessels, kidney and other organs are coordinated while performing physicalexercises. In our body the neural system and the endocrine system jointlycoordinate and integrate all the activities of the organs so that they functionin a synchronised fashion.The neural system provides an organised network of point-to-pointconnections for a quick coordination. The endocrine system provideschemical integration through hormones. In this chapter, you will learnabout the neural system of human, mechanisms of neural coordinationlike transmission of nerve impulse, impulse conduction across a synapseand the physiology of reflex action.NEURAL CONTROL ANDCOORDINATIONCHAPTER  2121.1Neural System21.2Human Neural
System21.3Neuron as
Structural and
Functional Unit
of Neural
System21.4  Central NeuralSystem21.5Reflex Action
and Reflex Arc21.6Sensory
Reception and
Processing
316BIOLOGY21.1NEURAL SYSTEMThe neural system of all animals is composed of highly specialised cellscalled neurons which can detect, receive and transmit different kinds ofstimuli.The neural organisation is very simple in lower invertebrates. Forexample, in Hydra it is composed of a network of neurons. The neuralsystem is better organised in insects, where a brain is present along with
a number of ganglia and neural tissues. The vertebrates have a more
developed neural system.21.2HUMAN NEURAL SYSTEMThe human neural system is divided into two parts :(i)the central neural system (CNS)(ii)the peripheral neural system (PNS)The CNS includes the brain and the spinal cord and is the site ofinformation processing and control. The PNS comprises of all the nervesof the body associated with the CNS (brain and spinal cord). The nerve
fibres of the PNS are of two types :(a) afferent fibres(b) efferent fibresThe afferent nerve fibres transmit impulses from tissues/organs tothe CNS and the efferent fibres transmit regulatory impulses from the
CNS to the concerned peripheral tissues/organs.The PNS is divided into two divisions called somatic neural systemand autonomic neural system. The somatic neural system relaysimpulses from the CNS to skeletal muscles while the autonomic neural
system transmits impulses from the CNS to the involuntary organs and
smooth muscles of the body. The autonomic neural system is further
classified into sympathetic neural system and parasympathetic neuralsystem.21.3NEURON AS STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL UNIT OFNEURAL SYSTEMA neuron is a microscopic structure composed of three major parts,
namely, cell body, dendrites and axon (Figure 21.1). The cell bodycontains cytoplasm with typical cell organelles and certain granular bodies
called Nissl™s granules. Short fibres which branch repeatedly and projectout of the cell body also contain Nissl™s granules and are called dendrites.
These fibres transmit impulses towards the cell body.   The axon is a long
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION317fibre, the distal end of which is branched. Eachbranch terminates as a bulb-like structure called
synaptic knob which possess synaptic vesiclescontaining chemicals called neurotransmitters.The axons transmit nerve impulses away from the
cell body to a synapse or to a neuro-muscular
junction. Based on the number of axon and
dendrites, the neurons are divided into three types,
i.e., multipolar (with one axon and two or moredendrites; found in the cerebral cortex), bipolar(with one axon and one dendrite, found in the retina
of eye) and unipolar (cell body with one axon only;found usually in the embryonic stage). There are
two types of axons, namely, myelinated and non-myelinated. The myelinated nerve fibres areenveloped with Schwann cells, which form a myelinsheath around the axon. The gaps between two
adjacent myelin sheaths are called nodes ofRanvier. Myelinated nerve fibres are found in spinaland cranial nerves. Unmyelinated nerve fibre is
enclosed by a Schwann cell that does not form a
myelin sheath around the axon, and is commonly
found in autonomous and the somatic neural
systems.21.3.1Generation and Conduction ofNerve ImpulseNeurons are excitable cells because their membranes are in a polarisedstate. Do you know why the membrane of a neuron is polarised? Differenttypes of ion channels are present on the neural membrane. These ion
channels are selectively permeable to different ions. When a neuron is not
conducting any impulse, i.e., resting, the axonal membrane is
comparatively more permeable to potassium ions (K+) and nearlyimpermeable to sodium ions (Na+). Similarly, the membrane isimpermeable to negatively charged proteins present in the axoplasm.
Consequently, the axoplasm inside the axon contains high concentration
of K+ and negatively charged proteins and low concentration of Na+. Incontrast, the fluid outside the axon contains a low concentration of K+, ahigh concentration of Na+ and thus form a concentration gradient. Theseionic gradients across the resting membrane are maintained by the active
transport of ions by the sodium-potassium pump which transports 3
Na+ outwards for 2 K+ into the cell. As a result, the outer surface of theaxonal membrane possesses a positive charge while its inner surfaceFigure 21.1 Structure of a neuron
318BIOLOGYbecomes negatively charged and therefore is polarised. The electricalpotential difference across the resting plasma membrane is called as the
resting potential.You might be curious to know about the mechanisms of generationof nerve impulse and its conduction along an axon. When a stimulus is
applied at a site (Figure 21.2 e.g., point A) on the polarised membrane,
the membrane at the site A becomes freely permeable to Na+. This leadsto a rapid influx of Na+ followed by the reversal of the polarity at that site,i.e., the outer surface of the membrane becomes negatively charged and
the inner side becomes positively charged. The polarity of the membrane
at the site A is thus reversed and hence depolarised. The electrical potential
difference across the plasma membrane at the site A is called the
action potential, which is in fact termed as a nerve impulse. At sitesimmediately ahead, the axon (e.g., site B) membrane has a positive charge
on the outer surface and a negative charge on its inner surface. As a
result, a current flows on the inner surface from site A to site B. On the
outer surface current flows from site B to site A (Figure 21.2) to complete
the circuit of current flow. Hence, the polarity at the site is reversed, and
an action potential is generated at site B.  Thus, the impulse (actionpotential) generated at site A arrives at site B. The sequence is repeated
along the length of the axon and consequently the impulse is conducted.
The rise in the stimulus-induced permeability to Na+ is extremely short-lived. It is quickly followed by a rise in permeability to K+. Within a fractionof a second, K+ diffuses outside the membrane and restores the restingpotential of the membrane at the site of excitation and the fibre becomes
once more responsive to further stimulation.----------
---------
-++++++++
++
+++++
++
+++++++--
----------
---------
-++++++++
++
+++++
++
+++++++--
ANaBNaFigure 21.2Diagrammatic representation of impulse conduction through an axon(at points A and B)
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION31921.3.2Transmission of ImpulsesA nerve impulse is transmitted from one neuron to another throughjunctions called synapses. A synapse is formed by the membranes of apre-synaptic neuron and a post-synaptic neuron, which may or may not
be separated by a gap called synaptic cleft. There are two types ofsynapses, namely, electrical synapses and chemical synapses. At electrical
synapses, the membranes of pre- and post-synaptic neurons are in very
close proximity. Electrical current can flow directly from one neuron into
the other across these synapses. Transmission of an impulse across
electrical synapses is very similar to impulse conduction along a single
axon. Impulse transmission across an electrical synapse is always faster
than that across a chemical synapse. Electrical synapses are rare in our
system.At a chemical synapse, the membranes of the pre- and post-synapticneurons are separated by a fluid-filled space called synaptic cleft
(Figure 21.3). Do you know how the pre-synaptic neuron transmits animpulse (action potential) across the synaptic cleft to the post-synaptic
neuron? Chemicals called neurotransmitters are involved in thetransmission of impulses at these synapses. The axon terminals contain
vesicles filled with these neurotransmitters. When an impulse (action
potential) arrives at the axon terminal, it stimulates the movement of the
synaptic vesicles towards the membrane where they fuse with the plasmaFigure 21.3 Diagram showing axon terminal and synapse
320BIOLOGYmembrane and release their neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft. Thereleased neurotransmitters bind to their specific receptors, present onthe post-synaptic membrane. This binding opens ion channels allowing
the entry of ions which can generate a new potential in the post-synaptic
neuron. The new potential developed may be either excitatory or
inhibitory.21.4CENTRAL NEURAL SYSTEMThe brain is the central information processing organ of our body, andacts as the ‚command and control system™. It controls the voluntary
movements, balance of the body, functioning of vital involuntary organs
(e.g., lungs, heart, kidneys, etc.), thermoregulation, hunger and thirst,
circadian (24-hour) rhythms of our body, activities of several endocrine
glands and human behaviour.  It is also the site for processing of vision,
hearing, speech, memory, intelligence, emotions and thoughts.The human brain is well protected by the skull. Inside the skull, thebrain is covered by cranial meninges consisting of an outer layer calleddura mater, a very thin middle layer called arachnoid and an inner layer(which is in contact with the brain tissue) called pia mater. The brain canbe divided into three major parts: (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain, and(iii) hindbrain (Figure 21.4).Figure 21.4 Diagram showing sagital section of the human brainForebrain
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION32121.4.1ForebrainThe forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and hypothalamus (Figure21.4). Cerebrum forms the major part of the human brain. A deep cleftdivides the cerebrum longitudinally into two halves, which are termed asthe left and right cerebral hemispheres. The hemispheres are connectedby a tract of nerve fibres called corpus callosum. The layer of cells whichcovers the cerebral hemisphere is called cerebral cortex and is throwninto prominent folds. The cerebral cortex is referred to as the grey matterdue to its greyish appearance. The neuron cell bodies are concentratedhere giving the colour. The cerebral cortex contains motor areas, sensoryareas and large regions that are neither clearly sensory nor motor infunction. These regions called as the association areas are responsiblefor complex functions like intersensory associations, memory and
communication. Fibres of the tracts are covered with the myelin sheath,which constitute the inner part of cerebral hemisphere. They give anopaque white appearance to the layer and, hence, is called the white matter.The cerebrum wraps around a structure called thalamus, which is a majorcoordinating centre for sensory and motor signaling. Another veryimportant part of the brain called hypothalamus lies at the base of thethalamus. The hypothalamus contains a number of centres which control
body temperature, urge for eating and drinking. It also contains severalgroups of neurosecretory cells, which secrete hormones called
hypothalamic hormones. The inner parts of cerebral hemispheres and agroup of associated deep structures like amygdala, hippocampus, etc.,form a complex structure called the limbic lobe or limbic system. Alongwith the hypothalamus, it is involved in the regulation of sexual behaviour,expression of emotional reactions (e.g., excitement, pleasure, rage andfear), and motivation.21.4.2MidbrainThe midbrain is located between the thalamus/hypothalamus of theforebrain and pons of the hindbrain. A canal called the cerebral aqueductpassess through the midbrain. The dorsal portion of the midbrain consists
mainly of four round swellings (lobes) called corpora quadrigemina.Midbrain and hindbrain form the brain stem.21.4.3HindbrainThe hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla (also called themedulla oblongata). Pons consists of fibre tracts that interconnect differentregions of the brain. Cerebellum has very convoluted surface in order to
provide the additional space for many more neurons. The medulla of the
brain is connected to the spinal cord. The medulla contains centres which
control respiration, cardiovascular reflexes and gastric secretions.
322BIOLOGY21.5REFLEX ACTION AND REFLEX ARCYou must have experienced a sudden withdrawal of a body part whichcomes in contact with objects that are extremely hot, cold  pointed or
animals that are scary or poisonous. The entire process of response to a
peripheral nervous stimulation, that occurs involuntarily, i.e., without
conscious effort or thought and requires the involvment of a part of the
central nervous system is called a reflex action. The reflex pathwaycomprises at least one afferent neuron (receptor) and one efferent (effector
or excitor) neuron appropriately arranged in a series (Figure 21.5). The
afferent neuron receives signal from a sensory organ and transmits the
impulse via a dorsal nerve root into the CNS (at the level of spinal cord).
The efferent nueuron then carries signals from CNS to the effector. The
stimulus and response thus forms a reflex arc as shown below in the
knee jerk reflex. You should carefully study Figure 21.5 to understand
the mechanism of a knee jerk reflex.21.6SENSORY RECEPTION AND PROCESSINGHave you ever thought how do you feel the climatic changes in theenvironment? How do you see an object and its colour? How do you
hear a sound? The sensory organs detect all types of changes in theenvironment and send appropriate signals to the CNS, where all the inputs
are processed and analysed. Signals are then sent to different parts/
centres of the brain. This is how you can sense changes in the environment.Figure 21.5 Diagrammatic presentation of reflex action (showing knee jerk reflex)
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION323In the following sections, you will be introduced to the structure andfunctioning of the eye (sensory organ for vision) and the ear (sensory organ
for hearing).21.6.1EyeOur paired eyes are located in sockets of the skull called orbits. A briefaccount of structure and functions of the human eye is given in thefollowing sections.21.6.1.1Parts of an eyeThe adult human eye ball is nearly a spherical structure. The wall of theeye ball is composed of three layers (Figure 21.6). The external layer is
composed of a dense connective tissue and is called the sclera. The anteriorportion of this layer is called the cornea. The middle layer, choroid,contains many blood vessels and looks bluish in colour. The choroid layer
is thin over the posterior two-thirds of the eye ball, but it becomes thick
in the anterior part to form the ciliary body. The ciliary body itselfcontinues forward to form a pigmented and opaque structure called the
iris which is the visible coloured portion of the eye. The eye ball containsa transparent crystalline lens which is held in place by ligaments attachedto the ciliary body. In front of the lens, the aperture surrounded by the
iris is called the pupil. The diameter of the pupil is regulated by the musclefibres of iris.The inner layer is the retina and it contains three layers of neural cells Œfrom inside to outside Œ ganglion cells, bipolar cells and photoreceptor cells.Figure 21.6  Diagram showing parts of an eye
324BIOLOGYThere are two types of photoreceptor cells, namely, rods and cones. Thesecells contain the light-sensitive proteins called the photopigments. Thedaylight (photopic) vision and colour vision are functions of cones and
the twilight (scotopic) vision is the function of the rods. The rods contain
a purplish-red protein called the rhodopsin or visual purple, which
contains a derivative of Vitamin A. In the human eye, there are three types
of cones which possess their own characteristic photopigments that
respond to red, green and blue lights. The sensations of different colours
are produced by various combinations of these cones and their
photopigments. When these cones are stimulated equally, a sensation of
white light is produced.The optic nerves leave the eye and the retinal blood vessels enter it ata point medial to and slightly above the posterior pole of the eye ball.
Photoreceptor cells are not present in that region and hence it is called
the blind spot. At the posterior pole of the eye lateral to the blind spot,there is a yellowish pigmented spot called macula lutea with a central pit
called the fovea. The fovea is a thinned-out portion of the retina whereonly the cones are densely packed. It is the point where the visual acuity
(resolution) is the greatest.The space between the cornea and the lens is called the aqueouschamber and contains a thin watery fluid called aqueous humor. The
space between the lens and the retina is called the vitreous chamberand is filled with a transparent gel called vitreous humor.21.6.1.2Mechanism of VisionThe light rays in visible wavelength focussed on the retina through thecornea and lens generate potentials (impulses) in rods and cones. As
mentioned earlier, the photosensitive compounds (photopigments) in the
human eyes is composed of opsin (a protein) and retinal (an aldehyde ofvitamin A). Light induces dissociation of the retinal from opsin resulting
in changes in the structure of the opsin. This causes membrane
permeability changes. As a result, potential differences are generated in
the photoreceptor cells. This produces a signal that generates action
potentials in the ganglion cells through the bipolar cells. These action
potentials (impulses) are transmitted by the optic nerves to the visualcortex area of the brain, where the neural impulses are analysed and theimage formed on the retina is recognised  based on earlier memory and
experience.21.6.2The EarThe ears perform two sensory functions, hearing and maintenance of bodybalance. Anatomically, the ear can be divided into three major sections
called the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear (Figure 21.7). The
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION325outer ear consists of the pinna and external auditory meatus (canal).The pinna collects the vibrations in the air which produce sound.  Theexternal auditory meatus leads inwards and extends up to the tympanicmembrane (the ear drum). There are very fine hairs and wax-secretingglands in the skin of the pinna and the meatus. The tympanic membraneis composed of connective tissues covered with skin outside and withmucus membrane inside. The middle ear contains three ossicles calledmalleus, incus and stapes which are attached to one another in a chain-like fashion. The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane and the
stapes is attached to the oval window of the cochlea. The ear ossiclesincrease the efficiency of transmission of sound waves to the inner ear. An
Eustachian tube connects the middle ear cavity with the pharynx. TheEustachian tube helps in equalising the pressures on either sides of the
ear drum.The fluid-filled inner ear called labyrinth consists of two parts, thebony and the membranous labyrinths. The bony labyrinth is a series ofchannels. Inside these channels lies the membranous labyrinth, which issurrounded by a fluid called perilymph. The membranous labyrinth isfilled with a fluid called endolymph. The coiled portion of the labyrinth iscalled cochlea. The membranes constituting cochlea, the reissner™s andbasilar, divide the surounding perilymph filled bony labyrinth into an
upper scala vestibuli and a lower scala tympani (Figure 21.8). The spacewithin cochlea called scala media is filled with endolymph. At the base ofthe cochlea, the scala vestibuli ends at the oval window, while the scalatympani terminates at the round window which opens to the middle ear.Figure 21.7 Diagrammatic view of ear
326BIOLOGYThe organ of corti is a structure located on the basilar membranewhich contains hair cells that act as auditory receptors. The hair cellsare present in rows on the internal side of the organ of corti. The basalend of the hair cell is in close contact with the afferent nerve fibres. A largenumber of processes called stereo cilia are projected from the apical partof each hair cell. Above the rows of the hair cells is a thin elastic membranecalled tectorial membrane.The inner ear also contains a complex system called vestibularapparatus, located above the cochlea. The vestibular apparatus iscomposed of three semi-circular canals and the otolith (macula is thesensory part of saccule and utricle). Each semi-circular canal lies in adifferent plane at right angles to each other. The membranous canals aresuspended in the perilymph of the bony canals. The base of canals isswollen and is called ampulla, which contains a projecting ridge calledcrista ampullaris which has hair cells. The saccule and utricle contain aprojecting ridge called macula. The crista and macula are the specificreceptors of the vestibular apparatus responsible for maintenance ofbalance of the body and posture.Figure 21.8  Diagrammatic representation of the sectional view of cochlea
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION327SUMMARYThe neural system coordinates and integrates functions as well as metabolicand homeostatic activities of all the organs. Neurons, the functional units of
neural system are excitable cells due to a differential concentration gradient of
ions across the membrane. The electrical potential difference across the resting
neural membrane is called the ‚resting potential™. The nerve impulse is conducted
along the axon membrane in the form of a wave of depolarisation and
repolarisation. A synapse is formed by the membranes of a pre-synaptic neuron
and a post-synaptic neuron which may or may not be separated by a gap called
synaptic cleft. Chemicals involved in the transmission of impulses at chemical
synapses are called neurotransmitters.Human neural system consists of two parts : (i) central neural system (CNS)and (ii) the peripheral neural system. The CNS consists of the brain and spiralcord. The brain can be divided into three major parts : (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrainand (iii) hindbrain. The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and
hypothalamus. The cerebrum is longitudinally divided into two halves that are
connected by the corpus callosum. A very important part of the forebrain called
hypothalamus controls the body temperature, eating and drinking. Inner partsof cerebral hemispheres and a group of associated deep structures form a complex
structure called limbic system which is concerned with olfaction, autonomic
responses, regulation of sexual behaviour, expression of emotional reactions,
and motivation. The midbrain receives and integrates visual, tactile and auditory
inputs. The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla. The cerebellum
integrates information received from the semicircular canals of the ear and the20.6.2.1Mechanism of HearingHow does ear convert sound waves into neural impulses, which are
sensed and processed by the brain enabling us to recognise a sound ?The external ear receives sound waves and directs them to the ear drum.
The ear drum vibrates in response to the sound waves and these vibrations
are transmitted through the ear ossicles (malleus, incus and stapes) to
the oval window. The vibrations are passed through the oval window on
to the fluid of the cochlea, where they generate waves in the lymphs. The
waves in the lymphs induce a ripple in the basilar membrane. These
movements of the basilar membrane bend the hair cells, pressing them
against the tectorial membrane. As a result, nerve impulses are generated
in the associated afferent neurons. These impulses are transmitted by
the afferent fibres via auditory nerves to the auditory cortex of the brain,
where the impulses are analysed and the sound is recognised.
328BIOLOGYauditory system. The medulla contains centres, which control respiration,cardiovascular reflexes, and gastric secretions. Pons consist of fibre tracts that
interconnect different regions of the brain. The entire process of involuntary
response to a peripheral nervous stimulation is called reflex action.Information regarding changes in the environment is received by the CNSthrough the sensory organs which are processed and analysed. Signals are then
sent for necessary adjustments. The wall of the human eye ball is composed of
three layers. The external layer is composed of cornea and sclera. Inside sclera is
the middle layer, which is called the choroid. Retina, the innermost layer, contains
two types of photoreceptor cells, namely rods and cones. The daylight (photopic)
vision and colour vision are functions of cones and twilight (scotopic) vision is the
function of the rods. The light enters through cornea, the lens and the images of
objects are formed on the retina.The ear can be divided into the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear. Themiddle ear contains three ossicles called malleus, incus and stapes. The fluid
filled inner ear is called the labyrinth, and the coiled portion of the labyrinth is
called cochlea. The organ of corti is a structure which contains hair cells that act
as auditory receptors and is located on the basilar membrane. The vibrations
produced in the ear drum are transmitted through the ear ossicles and oval window
to the fluid-filled inner ear. Nerve impulses are generated and transmitted by the
afferent fibres to the auditory cortex of the brain. The inner ear also contains a
complex system located above the cochlea called vestibular apparatus. It is
influenced by gravity and movements, and helps us in maintaining balance of the
body and posture.EXERCISES1.Briefly describe the structure of the following:
(a) Brain       (b) Eye       (c) Ear2.Compare the following:
(a) Central neural system (CNS) and Peripheral neural system (PNS)
(b) Resting potential and action potential
(c) Choroid and retina3.Explain the following processes:
(a) Polarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
(b) Depolarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
(c) Conduction of a nerve impulse along a nerve fibre
(d) Transmission of a nerve impulse across a chemical synapse4.Draw labelled diagrams of the following:
(a) Neuron       (b) Brain       (c) Eye       (d) Ear
NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION3295.Write short notes on the following:(a) Neural coordination(b) Forebrain(c) Midbrain(d) Hindbrain(e) Retina(f) Ear ossicles(g) Cochlea(h) Organ of Corti(i) Synapse6.Give a brief account of:
(a) Mechanism of synaptic transmission
(b) Mechanism of vision
(c) Mechanism of hearing7.Answer briefly:
(a) How do you perceive the colour of an object?
(b) Which part of our body helps us in maintaining the body balance?
(c) How does the eye regulate the amount of light that falls on the retina.8.Explain the following:
(a)Role of Na+ in the generation of action potential.(b)Mechanism of generation of light-induced impulse in the retina.(c)Mechanism through which a sound produces a nerve impulse in the
inner ear.9.Differentiate between:
(a) Myelinated and non-myelinated axons
(b) Dendrites and axons
(c) Rods and cones
(d) Thalamus and Hypothalamus
(e) Cerebrum and Cerebellum10.Answer the following:
(a) Which part of the ear determines the pitch of a sound?
(b) Which part of the human brain is the most developed?
(c)  Which part of our central neural system acts as a master clock?11.The region of the vertebrate eye, where the optic nerve passes out of the retina,
is called the
(a) fovea
(b) iris
(c) blind spot
(d) optic chaisma12.Distinguish between:
(a) afferent neurons and efferent neurons
(b) impulse conduction in a myelinated nerve fibre and unmyelinated nerve fibre
(c) aqueous humor and vitreous humor
(d) blind spot and yellow spot
(f) cranial nerves and spinal nerves.
