268BIOLOGYAs you have read earlier, oxygen (O2) is utilised by the organisms toindirectly break down nutrient molecules like glucose and to derive energyfor performing various activities. Carbon dioxide (CO2) which is harmfulis also released during the above catabolic reactions. It is, therefore, evident
that O2  has to be continuously provided to the cells and CO2 producedby the cells have to be released out. This process of exchange of O2 fromthe atmosphere with CO2 produced by the cells is called breathing,commonly known as respiration. Place your hands on your chest; youcan feel the chest moving up and down. You know that it is due to
breathing. How do we breathe? The respiratory organs and the mechanism
of breathing are described in the following sections of this chapter.17.1RESPIRATORY ORGANSMechanisms of breathing vary among different groups of animalsdepending mainly on their habitats and levels of organisation. Lowerinvertebrates like sponges, coelenterates, flatworms, etc., exchange O2with CO2 by simple diffusion over their entire body surface. Earthwormsuse their moist cuticle and insects have a network of tubes (trachealtubes) to transport atmospheric air within the body. Special vascularisedstructures called gills are used by most of the aquatic arthropods andmolluscs whereas vascularised bags called lungs are used by theterrestrial forms for the exchange of gases. Among vertebrates, fishesuse gills whereas reptiles, birds and mammals respire through lungs.Amphibians like frogs can respire through their moist skin also.Mammals have a well developed respiratory system.BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASESCHAPTER  1717.1Respiratory
Organs17.2Mechanism of
Breathing17.3Exchange of
Gases17.4Transport of
Gases17.5Regulation of
Respiration17.6Disorders of
Respiratory
System
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES26917.1.1Human Respiratory SystemWe have a pair of external nostrils opening out above the upper lips.It leads to a nasal chamber through the nasal passage. The nasal
chamber opens into the pharynx, a portion of which is the commonpassage for food and air. The pharynx opens through the larynx region
into the trachea. Larynx is a cartilaginous box which helps in soundproduction and hence called the sound box. During swallowing glottiscan be covered by a thin elastic cartilaginous flap called epiglottis  to
prevent the entry of food into the larynx. Trachea is a straight tube
extending up to the mid-thoracic cavity, which divides at the level of
5th thoracic vertebra into a right and left primary bronchi. Each bronchiundergoes repeated divisions to form the secondary and tertiary bronchi
and bronchioles ending up in very thin terminal bronchioles. Thetracheae, primary, secondary and tertiary bronchi, and initial
bronchioles are supported by incomplete cartilaginous rings. Each
terminal bronchiole gives rise to a number of very thin, irregular-walled
and vascularised bag-like structures called alveoli. The branchingnetwork of bronchi, bronchioles and alveoli comprise the lungs (Figure
17.1). We have two lungs which are covered by a double layered pleura,
with pleural fluid between them. It reduces friction on the lung-surface.
The outer pleural membrane is in close contact with the thoracicBronchus
LungheartDiaphragmEpiglottisLarynxTrachea
Cut end of ribPleural membranesAlveoliPleural fluidBronchiole
Figure 17.1Diagrammatic view of human respiratory system (Sectional view ofthe left lung is also shown)
270BIOLOGYlining whereas the inner pleural membrane is in contact with the lungsurface. The part starting with the external nostrils up to the terminal
bronchioles constitute the conducting part whereas the alveoli and their
ducts form the respiratory or exchange part of the respiratory system.
The conducting part transports the atmospheric air to the alveoli, clears
it from foreign particles, humidifies and also brings the air to body
temperature. Exchange part is the site of actual diffusion of O2 and CO2between blood and atmospheric air.The lungs are situated in the thoracic chamber which is anatomicallyan air-tight chamber. The thoracic chamber is formed dorsally by the
vertebral column, ventrally by the sternum, laterally by the ribs and on
the lower side by the dome-shaped diaphragm. The anatomical setup of
lungs in thorax is such that any change in the volume of the thoracic
cavity will be reflected in the lung (pulmonary) cavity. Such an
arrangement is essential for breathing, as we cannot directly alter the
pulmonary volume.Respiration involves the following steps:(i)Breathing or pulmonary ventilation by which atmospheric airis drawn in and CO2 rich alveolar air is released out.(ii)Diffusion of gases (O2 and CO2) across alveolar membrane.(iii)Transport of gases by the blood.(iv)Diffusion of O2 and CO2 between blood and tissues.(v)Utilisation of O2 by the cells for catabolic reactions and resultantrelease of CO2 (cellular respiration as dealt in the Chapter 14).17.2MECHANISM OF BREATHINGBreathing involves two stages : inspiration during which atmosphericair is drawn in and expiration by which the alveolar air is released out.The movement of air into and out of the lungs is carried out by creating a
pressure gradient between the lungs and the atmosphere. Inspiration
can occur if the pressure within the lungs (intra-pulmonary pressure) is
less than the atmospheric pressure, i.e., there is a negative pressure in
the lungs with respect to atmospheric pressure. Similarly, expiration takes
place when the intra-pulmonary pressure is higher than the atmospheric
pressure. The diaphragm and a specialised set of muscles Œ external and
internal intercostals between the ribs, help in generation of such gradients.
Inspiration is initiated by the contraction of diaphragm which increases
the volume of thoracic chamber in the antero-posterior axis. The
contraction of external inter-costal muscles lifts up the ribs and the
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES271sternum causing an increase in the volume ofthe thoracic chamber in the  dorso-ventral axis.
The overall increase in the thoracic volume
causes a similar increase in pulmonary
volume. An increase in pulmonary volume
decreases the intra-pulmonary pressure to less
than the atmospheric pressure which forces
the air from outside to move into the lungs,
i.e., inspiration (Figure 17.2a). Relaxation of
the diaphragm and the inter-costal muscles
returns the diaphragm and sternum to their
normal positions and reduce the thoracic
volume and thereby the pulmonary volume.
This leads to an increase in intra-pulmonary
pressure to slightly above the atmospheric
pressure causing the expulsion of air from the
lungs, i.e., expiration (Figure 17.2b). We have
the ability to increase the strength of
inspiration and expiration with the help of
additional muscles in the abdomen. On an
average, a healthy human breathes 12-16times/minute. The volume of air involved in
breathing movements can be estimated by
using a spirometer which helps in clinical
assessment of pulmonary functions.17.2.1Respiratory Volumes andCapacitiesTidal Volume (TV): Volume of air inspired orexpired during a normal respiration. It isapprox. 500 mL., i.e., a healthy man caninspire or expire approximately 6000 to 8000mL of air per minute.Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV):Additional volume of air, a person can inspireby a forcible inspiration. This averages 2500mL to 3000 mL.Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV):Additional volume of air, a person can expire
by a forcible expiration. This averages 1000
mL to 1100 mL.Figure 17.2  Mechanism of breathing showing :(a) inspiration  (b) expiration
272BIOLOGYResidual Volume (RV): Volume of air remaining in the lungs even after aforcible expiration. This averages 1100 mL to 1200 mL.By adding up a few respiratory volumes described above, one canderive various pulmonary capacities, which can be used in clinicaldiagnosis.Inspiratory Capacity (IC): Total volume of air a person can inspire aftera normal expiration. This includes tidal volume and inspiratory reservevolume (TV+IRV).Expiratory Capacity (EC): Total volume of air a person can expire aftera normal inspiration. This includes tidal volume and expiratory reserve
volume (TV+ERV).Functional Residual Capacity (FRC): Volume of air that will remain inthe lungs after a normal expiration. This includes ERV+RV.
Vital Capacity (VC): The maximum volume of air a person can breathe inafter a forced expiration. This includes ERV, TV and IRV or the maximumvolume of air a person can breathe out after a forced inspiration.Total Lung Capacity: Total volume of air accommodated in the lungs atthe end of a forced inspiration. This includes RV, ERV, TV and IRV orvital capacity + residual volume.17.3EXCHANGE OF GASESAlveoli are the primary sites of exchange of gases. Exchange of gases alsooccur between blood and tissues. O2 and CO2 are exchanged in thesesites by simple diffusion mainly based on pressure/concentration
gradient. Solubility of the gases as well as the thickness of the membranes
involved in diffusion are also some important factors that can affect the
rate of diffusion.Pressure contributed by an individual gas in a mixture of gases iscalled partial pressure and is represented as pO2 for oxygen and pCO2 forcarbon dioxide. Partial pressures of these two gases in the atmospheric
air and the two sites of diffusion are given in Table 17.1 and in
Figure 17.3. The data given in the table clearly indicates a concentration
gradient for oxygen from alveoli to blood and blood to tissues. Similarly,TABLE 17.1Partial Pressures (in mm Hg) of Oxygen and Carbon dioxide at DifferentParts Involved in Diffusion in Comparison to those in AtmosphereRespiratoryAtmosphericAlveoliBloodBlood
TissuesGasAir(Deoxygenated)(Oxygenated)O2159104
409540
CO20.340454045

BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES273a gradient is present for CO2 in the oppositedirection, i.e., from tissues to blood andblood to alveoli. As the solubility of CO2 is20-25 times higher than that of O2, theamount of CO2 that can diffuse through thediffusion membrane per unit difference in
partial pressure is much higher compared
to that of O2. The diffusion membrane ismade up of three major layers (Figure 17.4)
namely, the thin squamous epithelium of
alveoli, the endothelium of alveolar capillaries
and the basement substance in between
them. However, its total thickness is much
less than a millimetre. Therefore, all the
factors in our body are favourable for
diffusion of O2 from alveoli to tissues and thatof CO2 from tissues to alveoli.AirAlveolar wall(one-celled thick)Red bloodcellBloodcapillaryBasementsubstanceAlveolar cavityFigure 17.4A Diagram of a section of analveolus with a pulmonarycapillary.Figure 17.3Diagrammatic representation of exchange of gases at the alveolus andthe body tissues with blood and transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide
274BIOLOGY17.4TRANSPORT OF GASESBlood is the medium of transport for O2 and CO2. About 97 per cent of O2 istransported by RBCs in the blood. The remaining 3 per cent of O2 is carriedin a dissolved state through the plasma. Nearly 20-25 per cent of CO2 istransported by RBCs whereas 70 per cent of it is carried as bicarbonate.About 7 per cent of CO2 is carried in a dissolved state through plasma.17.4.1Transport of OxygenHaemoglobin is a red coloured iron containing pigment present in theRBCs. O2 can bind with haemoglobin in a reversible manner to formoxyhaemoglobin. Each haemoglobin molecule can carry a maximum offour molecules of O2. Binding of oxygen with haemoglobin is primarilyrelated to partial pressure of O2. Partial pressure of CO2, hydrogen ionconcentration and temperature are the other factors which can interfere
with this binding. A sigmoid curve is obtained when percentage saturationof haemoglobin with O2 is plotted against thepO2. This curve is called the Oxygendissociation curve (Figure 17.5) and is highly
useful in studying the effect of factors like
pCO2, H+ concentration, etc., on binding of O2with haemoglobin. In the alveoli, where there
is high pO2, low pCO2, lesser H+ concentrationand lower temperature, the factors are
all favourable for the formation of
oxyhaemoglobin, whereas in the tissues,
where low pO2, high pCO2, high H+concentration and higher temperature exist,
the conditions are favourable for dissociation
of oxygen from the oxyhaemoglobin. This
clearly indicates that O2 gets bound tohaemoglobin in the lung surface and gets
dissociated at the tissues. Every 100 ml of
oxygenated blood can deliver around 5 ml of
O2 to the tissues under normal physiologicalconditions.17.4.2   Transport of Carbon dioxideCO2 is carried by haemoglobin as carbamino-haemoglobin (about20-25 per cent). This binding is related to the partial pressure of CO2.pO2 is a major factor which could affect this binding. When pCO2 is highand pO2 is low as in the tissues, more binding of carbon dioxide occurswhereas, when the pCO2 is low and pO2 is high as in the alveoli, dissociation20020404060608080100100Partial pressure of oxygen (mm Hg)
Percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen
Figure 17.5  Oxygen dissociation curve
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES275of CO2 from carbamino-haemoglobin takes place, i.e., CO2 which is boundto haemoglobin from the tissues is delivered at the alveoli. RBCs containa very high concentration of the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase and minute
quantities of the same is present in the plasma too. This enzyme facilitates
the following reaction in both directions.COHO
HCO
Carbonic
anhydrase
Carbonic
anhydra
22
23
+¾®
¾¾¾¾¾
¬¾
¾¾¾¾¾
sse
HCOH
¾®
¾¾¾¾¾
¬¾
¾¾¾¾¾
+-+
3At the tissue site where partial pressure of CO2 is high due tocatabolism, CO2 diffuses into blood (RBCs and plasma) and forms HCO3Œand H+,. At the alveolar site where pCO2 is low, the reaction proceeds inthe opposite direction leading to the formation of CO2 and H2O. Thus,CO2 trapped as bicarbonate at the tissue level and transported to thealveoli is released out as CO2 (Figure 17.4). Every 100 ml of deoxygenatedblood delivers approximately 4 ml of CO2 to the alveoli.17.5REGULATION OF RESPIRATIONHuman beings have a significant ability to maintain and moderate the
respiratory rhythm to suit the demands of the body tissues. This is done
by the neural system. A specialised centre present in the medulla region
of the brain called respiratory rhythm centre is primarily responsible for
this regulation. Another centre present in the pons region of the brain
called pneumotaxic centre can moderate the functions of the respiratory
rhythm centre. Neural signal from this centre can reduce the duration of
inspiration and thereby alter the respiratory rate. A chemosensitive area
is situated adjacent to the rhythm centre which is highly sensitive to CO2and hydrogen ions. Increase in these substances can activate this centre,
which in turn can signal the rhythm centre to make necessary adjustments
in the respiratory process by which these substances can be eliminated.
Receptors associated with aortic arch and carotid artery also can recognise
changes in CO2 and H+ concentration and send necessary signals to therhythm centre for remedial actions. The role of oxygen in the regulation of
respiratory rhythm is quite insignificant.17.6DISORDERS OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEMAsthma is a difficulty in breathing causing wheezing due to inflammationof bronchi and bronchioles.Emphysema is a chronic disorder in which alveolar walls are damageddue to which respiratory surface is decreased. One of the major causes ofthis is cigarette smoking.
276BIOLOGYSUMMARYCells utilise oxygen for metabolism and produce energy along with substanceslike carbon dioxide which is harmful. Animals have evolved different mechanisms
for the transport of oxygen to the cells and for the removal of carbon dioxide from
there. We have a well developed respiratory system comprising two lungs and
associated air passages to perform this function.The first step in respiration is breathing by which atmospheric air is taken in(inspiration) and the alveolar air is released out (expiration). Exchange of O2 andCO2 between deoxygenated blood and alveoli, transport of these gases throughoutthe body by blood, exchange of O2 and CO2 between the oxygenated blood andtissues and utilisation of O2 by the cells (cellular respiration) are the other stepsinvolved.Inspiration and expiration are carried out by creating pressure gradientsbetween the atmosphere and the alveoli with the help of specialised muscles Œ
intercostals and diaphragm. Volumes of air involved in these activities can be
estimated with the help of spirometer and are of clinical significance.Exchange of O2 and CO2 at the alveoli and tissues occur by diffusion. Rate ofdiffusion is dependent on the partial pressure gradients of O2 (pO2) and CO2 (pCO2),their solubility as well as the thickness of the diffusion surface. These factors in
our body facilitate diffusion of O2 from the alveoli to the deoxygenated blood aswell as from the oxygenated blood to the tissues. The factors are favourable for the
diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direction, i.e., from tissues to alveoli.Oxygen is transported mainly as oxyhaemoglobin. In the alveoli where pO2 ishigher, O2 gets bound to haemoglobin which is easily dissociated at the tissueswhere pO2 is low and pCO2 and H+ concentration are high. Nearly 70 per cent ofcarbon dioxide is transported as bicarbonate (HCO3Œ) with the help of the enzymecarbonic anhydrase. 20-25 per cent of carbon dioxide is carried by haemoglobin
as carbamino-haemoglobin. In the tissues where pCO2 is high, it gets bound toblood whereas in the alveoli where pCO2 is low and pO2 is high, it gets removedfrom the blood.Respiratory rhythm is maintained by the respiratory centre in the medullaregion of brain. A pneumotaxic centre in the pons region of the brain and a
chemosensitive area in the medulla can alter respiratory mechanism.Occupational Respiratory Disorders: In certain industries, especiallythose involving grinding or stone-breaking, so much dust is produced
that the defense mechanism of the body cannot fully cope with the
situation. Long exposure can give rise to inflammation leading to fibrosis
(proliferation of fibrous tissues) and thus causing serious lung damage.
Workers in such industries should wear protective masks.
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES277EXERCISES1.Define vital capacity. What is its significance?2.State the volume of air remaining in the lungs after a normal breathing.3.Diffusion of gases occurs in the alveolar region only and not in the other parts ofrespiratory system. Why?4.What are the major transport mechanisms for CO2? Explain.5.What will be the pO2 and pCO2 in the atmospheric air compared to those in thealveolar air ?(i)pO2 lesser,pCO2 higher(ii)pO2 higher,pCO2 lesser(iii)pO2 higher,pCO2 higher(iv)pO2 lesser,pCO2 lesser6.Explain the process of inspiration under normal conditions.7.How is respiration regulated?8.What is the effect of pCO2 on oxygen transport?9.What happens to the respiratory process in a man going up a hill?10.What is the site of gaseous exchange in an insect?11.Define oxygen dissociation curve. Can you suggest any reason for its sigmoidalpattern?12.Have you heard about hypoxia? Try to gather information about it, and discuss
with your friends.13.Distinguish between(a) IRV and ERV
(b) Inspiratory capacity and Expiratory capacity.
(c) Vital capacity and Total lung capacity.14.What is Tidal volume? Find out the Tidal volume (approximate value) for a healthyhuman in an hour.
