278BIOLOGYYou have learnt that all living cells have to be provided with nutrients, O2and other essential substances. Also, the waste or harmful substancesproduced, have to be removed continuously for healthy functioning oftissues. It is therefore, essential to have efficient mechanisms for themovement of these substances to the cells and from the cells. Differentgroups of animals have evolved different methods for this transport. Simple
organisms like sponges and coelenterates circulate water from their
surroundings through their body cavities to facilitate the cells to exchange
these substances. More complex organisms use special fluids within their
bodies to transport such materials. Blood is the most commonly used bodyfluid by most of the higher organisms including humans for this purpose.
Another body fluid, lymph, also helps in the transport of certain substances.In this chapter, you will learn about the composition and properties of
blood and lymph (tissue fluid) and the mechanism of circulation of bloodis also explained herein.18.1BLOODBlood is a special connective tissue consisting of a fluid matrix, plasma,and formed elements.18.1.1PlasmaPlasma is a straw coloured, viscous fluid constituting nearly 55 per cent ofthe blood. 90-92 per cent of plasma is water and proteins contribute 6-8
per cent of it. Fibrinogen, globulins and albumins are the major proteins.BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATIONCHAPTER  1818.1Blood18.2Lymph (Tissue
Fluid)18.3Circulatory
Pathways18.4Double
Circulation18.5Regulation of
Cardiac Activity18.6Disorders of
Circulatory
System
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION279Fibrinogens are needed for clotting or coagulation of blood. Globulinsprimarly are involved in defense mechanisms of the body and the albumins
help in osmotic balance. Plasma also contains small amounts of minerals
like Na+, Ca++, Mg++, HCO3Œ, ClŒ, etc. Glucose, amino acids, lipids, etc., arealso present in the plasma as they are always in transit in the body. Factors
for coagulation or clotting of blood are also present in the plasma in an
inactive form. Plasma without the clotting factors is called serum.18.1.2Formed ElementsErythrocytes, leucocytes and platelets are collectively called formedelements (Figure 18.1) and they constitute nearly 45 per cent of the blood.Erythrocytes or red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant of allthe cells in blood. A healthy adult man has, on an average, 5 millions to
5.5 millions of RBCs mmŒ3 of blood. RBCs are formed in the red bonemarrow in the adults. RBCs are devoid of nucleus in most of the mammals
and are biconcave in shape. They have a red coloured, iron containing
complex protein called haemoglobin, hence the colour and name of these
cells. A healthy individual has 12-16 gms of haemoglobin in every
100 ml of blood. These molecules play a significant role in transport of
respiratory gases. RBCs have an average life span of 120 days after which
they are destroyed in the spleen (graveyard of RBCs).Leucocytes are also known as white blood cells (WBC) as they arecolourless due to the lack of haemoglobin. They are nucleated and are
relatively lesser in number which averages 6000-8000 mmŒ3 of blood.Leucocytes are generally short lived. We have two main categories of WBCs
Œ granulocytes and agranulocytes. Neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils
are different types of granulocytes, while lymphocytes and monocytes
are the agranulocytes. Neutrophils are the most abundant cells (60-65
per cent) of the total WBCs and basophils are the least (0.5-1 per cent)
among them. Neutrophils and monocytes (6-8 per cent) are phagocytic
cells which destroy foreign organisms entering the body. Basophils secrete
histamine, serotonin, heparin, etc., and are involved in inflammatory
reactions. Eosinophils (2-3 per cent) resist infections and are alsoR B CPlateletsEosinophilBasophilNeutrophil
MonocyteT lymphocyteB lymphocyteFigure 18.1 Diagrammatic representation of formed elements in blood
280BIOLOGYassociated with allergic reactions. Lymphocytes (20-25 per cent) are oftwo major types Œ ‚B™ and ‚T™ forms. Both B and T lymphocytes are
responsible for immune responses of the body.Platelets also called thrombocytes, are cell fragments produced frommegakaryocytes (special cells in the bone marrow). Blood normally
contains 1,500,00-3,500,00 platelets mmŒ3. Platelets can release a varietyof substances most of which are involved in the coagulation or clotting of
blood. A reduction in their number can lead to clotting disorders which
will lead to excessive loss of blood from the body.18.1.3Blood GroupsAs you know, blood of human beings differ in certain aspects though itappears to be similar. Various types of grouping of blood has been done.
Two such groupings Œ the ABO and Rh Œ are widely used all over the
world.18.1.3.1 ABO groupingABO grouping is based on the presence or absence of two surface antigens(chemicals that can induce immune response) on the RBCs namely A
and B. Similarly, the plasma of different individuals contain two natural
antibodies (proteins produced in response to antigens). The distribution
of antigens and antibodies in the four groups of blood, A, B, AB and Oare given in Table 18.1. You probably know that during blood transfusion,
any blood cannot be used; the blood of a donor has to be carefully matched
with the blood of a recipient before any blood transfusion to avoid severe
problems of clumping (destruction of RBC). The donor™s compatibility is
also shown in the Table 18.1.Blood GroupAntigens onAntibodiesDonor™s GroupRBCsin PlasmaAA
anti-BA, OBB
anti-AB, OABA, BnilAB, A, B, OOnilanti-A, BOTABLE 18.1  Blood Groups and Donor CompatibilityFrom the above mentioned table it is evident that group ‚O™ blood canbe donated to persons with any other blood group and hence ‚O™ group
individuals are called ‚universal donors™. Persons with ‚AB™ group can
accept blood from persons with AB as well as the other groups of blood.
Therefore, such persons are called ‚universal recipients™.
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION28118.1.3.2Rh groupingAnother antigen, the Rh antigen similar to one present in Rhesus monkeys(hence Rh), is also observed on the surface of RBCs of majority (nearly 80per cent) of humans. Such individuals are called Rh positive (Rh+ve)and those in whom this antigen is absent are called Rh negative (Rh-ve).An Rh-ve person, if exposed to Rh+ve blood, will form specific antibodiesagainst the Rh antigens. Therefore, Rh group should also be matchedbefore transfusions. A special case of Rh incompatibility (mismatching)has been observed between the Rh-ve blood of a pregnant mother withRh+ve blood of the foetus. Rh antigens of the foetus do not get exposed tothe Rh-ve blood of the mother in the first pregnancy as the two bloods arewell separated by the placenta. However, during the delivery of the firstchild, there is a possibility of exposure of the maternal blood to smallamounts of the Rh+ve blood from the foetus. In such cases, the motherstarts preparing antibodies against Rh antigen in her blood. In case ofher subsequent pregnancies, the Rh antibodies from the mother (Rh-ve)can leak into the blood of the foetus (Rh+ve) and destroy the foetal RBCs.This could be fatal to the foetus or could cause severe anaemia andjaundice to the baby. This condition is called erythroblastosis foetalis.This can be avoided by administering anti-Rh antibodies to the mother
immediately after the delivery of the first child.18.1.4Coagulation of BloodYou know that when you cut your finger or hurt yourself, your wounddoes not continue to bleed for a long time; usually the blood stops flowingafter sometime. Do you know why? Blood exhibits coagulation or clottingin response to an injury or trauma. This is a mechanism to prevent
excessive loss of blood from the body. You would have observed a darkreddish brown scum formed at the site of a cut or an injury over a periodof time. It is a clot or coagulam formed mainly of a network of threadscalled fibrins in which dead and damaged formed elements of blood aretrapped. Fibrins are formed by the conversion of inactive fibrinogens inthe plasma by the enzyme thrombin. Thrombins, in turn are formed fromanother inactive substance present in the plasma called prothrombin. Anenzyme complex, thrombokinase, is required for the above reaction. Thiscomplex is formed by a series of linked enzymic reactions (cascadeprocess) involving a number of factors present in the plasma in an inactivestate. An injury or a trauma stimulates the platelets in the blood to releasecertain factors which activate the mechanism of coagulation. Certainfactors released by the tissues at the site of injury also can initiatecoagulation. Calcium ions play a very important role in clotting.
282BIOLOGY18.2LYMPH (TISSUE FLUID)As the blood passes through the capillaries  in tissues, some water alongwith many small water soluble substances move out into the spaces
between the cells of tissues leaving the larger proteins and most of the
formed elements in the blood vessels. This fluid released out is called the
interstitial fluid or tissue fluid. It has the same mineral distribution as
that in plasma. Exchange of nutrients, gases, etc., between the blood and
the cells always occur through this fluid. An elaborate network of vessels
called the lymphatic system collects this fluid and drains it back to the
major veins. The fluid present in the lymphatic system is called the lymph.
Lymph is a colourless fluid containing specialised lymphocytes which
are responsible for the immune responses of the body. Lymph is also an
important carrier for nutrients, hormones, etc. Fats are absorbed through
lymph in the lacteals present in the intestinal villi.18.3CIRCULATORY PATHWAYSThe circulatory patterns are of two types Œ open or closed. Opencirculatory system is present in arthropods and molluscs in which bloodpumped by the heart passes through large vessels into open spaces orbody cavities called sinuses. Annelids and chordates have a closedcirculatory system in which the blood pumped by the heart is alwayscirculated through a closed network of blood vessels. This pattern is
considered to be more advantageous as the flow of fluid can be  more
precisely regulated.All vertebrates possess a muscular chambered heart. Fishes have a2-chambered heart with an atrium and a ventricle. Amphibians and thereptiles (except crocodiles) have a 3-chambered heart with two atria and asingle ventricle, whereas crocodiles, birds and mammals possess a
4-chambered heart with two atria and two ventricles. In fishes the heartpumps out deoxygenated blood which is oxygenated by the gills and
supplied to the body parts from where deoxygenated blood is returned to
the heart (single circulation). In amphibians and reptiles, the left atrium
receives oxygenated blood from the gills/lungs/skin and the right atrium
gets the deoxygenated blood from other body parts. However, they get mixed
up in the single ventricle which pumps out mixed blood (incomplete double
circulation). In birds and mammals, oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
received by the left and right atria respectively passes on to the ventricles of
the same sides. The ventricles pump it out without any mixing up, i.e., twoseparate circulatory pathways are present in these organisms, hence, theseanimals have double circulation. Let us study the human circulatorysystem.
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION28318.3.1Human Circulatory SystemHuman circulatory system, also called the blood vascular system consistsof a muscular chambered heart, a network of closed branching blood
vessels and blood, the fluid which is circulated.Heart, the mesodermally derived organ, is situated in the thoraciccavity, in between the two lungs, slightly tilted to the left. It has the size of
a clenched fist. It is protected by a double walled membranous bag,
pericardium, enclosing the pericardial fluid. Our heart has fourchambers, two relatively small upper  chambers called atria and two largerlower chambers called ventricles. A thin, muscular wall called the inter-atrial septum separates the right and the left atria, whereas a thick-walled,
the inter-ventricular septum, separates the left and the right ventricles
(Figure 18.2). The atrium and the ventricle of the same side are also
separated by a thick fibrous tissue called the atrio-ventricular septum.
However, each of these septa are provided with an opening through which
the two chambers of the  same side are connected. The opening between
the right atrium and the right ventricle is guarded by a valve formed of
three  muscular flaps or cusps, the tricuspid valve, whereas a bicuspid
or mitral valve guards the opening between the left atrium and the left
ventricle. The openings of the right and the left ventricles into theFigure 18.2 Section of a human heart
284BIOLOGYpulmonary artery and the aorta respectively are provided with thesemilunar valves. The valves in the heart allows the flow of blood only in
one direction, i.e., from the atria to the ventricles and from the ventricles
to the pulmonary artery or aorta. These valves prevent any backward
flow.The entire heart is made of cardiac muscles. The walls of ventriclesare much thicker than that of the atria. A specialised cardiac musculature
called the nodal tissue is also distributed in the heart (Figure 18.2). A
patch of this tissue is present in the right upper corner of the right atrium
called the sino-atrial node (SAN). Another mass of this tissue is seen inthe lower left corner of the right atrium close to the atrio-ventricular septum
called the atrio-ventricular node (AVN). A bundle of nodal fibres, atrio-ventricular bundle (AV bundle) continues from the AVN which passes
through the atrio-ventricular septa to emerge on the top of the inter-
ventricular septum and immediately divides into a right and left bundle.
These branches give rise to minute fibres throughout the ventricular
musculature of the respective sides and are called purkinje fibres. These
fibres alongwith right and left bundles are known as bundle of His. The
nodal musculature has the ability to generate action potentials without
any external stimuli, i.e., it is autoexcitable. However, the number of action
potentials that could be generated in a minute vary at different parts of
the nodal system. The SAN can generate the maximum number of action
potentials, i.e., 70-75 minŒ1, and is responsible for initiating andmaintaining the rhythmic contractile activity of the heart. Therefore, it is
called the pacemaker. Our heart normally beats 70-75 times in a minute
(average 72 beats minŒ1).18.3.2Cardiac CycleHow does the heart function? Let us take a look. To begin with, all the
four chambers of heart are in a relaxed state, i.e., they are in  joint diastole.As the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are open, blood from the pulmonaryveins and vena cava flows into the left and the right ventricle respectivelythrough the left and right atria. The semilunar valves are closed at thisstage. The SAN now generates an action potential which stimulates boththe atria to undergo a simultaneous contraction Œ the atrial systole. Thisincreases the flow of blood into the ventricles by about 30 per cent. Theaction potential is conducted to the ventricular side by the AVN and AVbundle from where the bundle of His transmits it through the entireventricular musculature. This causes the ventricular muscles to contract,(ventricular systole), the atria undergoes relaxation  (diastole), coincidingwith the ventricular systole. Ventricular systole increases the ventricular
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION285pressure causing the closure of tricuspid and bicuspid valves due toattempted backflow of blood into the atria. As the ventricular pressureincreases further, the semilunar valves guarding the pulmonary artery(right side) and the aorta (left side) are forced open, allowing the blood inthe ventricles to flow through these vessels into the circulatory pathways.The ventricles now relax (ventricular diastole) and the ventricular pressurefalls causing the closure of semilunar valves which prevents the backflowof blood into the ventricles. As the ventricular pressure declines further,the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are pushed open by the pressure in theatria exerted by the blood which was being emptied into them by theveins. The blood now once again moves freely to the ventricles. Theventricles and atria are now again in a relaxed (joint diastole) state, asearlier. Soon the SAN generates a new action potential and the eventsdescribed above are repeated in that sequence and the process continues.This sequential event in the heart which is cyclically repeated is calledthe cardiac cycle and it consists of systole and diastole of both the atriaand ventricles. As mentioned earlier, the heart beats 72 times  per minute,i.e., that many cardiac cycles are performed per minute. From this it couldbe deduced that the duration of a cardiac cycle is 0.8 seconds. During acardiac cycle, each ventricle pumps out approximately 70 mL of bloodwhich is called the stroke volume. The stroke volume multiplied by the
heart rate (no. of beats per min.) gives the cardiac output. Therefore, thecardiac output can be defined as the volume of blood pumped out by each
ventricle per minute and averages 5000 mL or 5 litres in a healthy individual.The body has the ability to alter the stroke volume as well as the heart rateand thereby the cardiac output. For example, the cardiac output of anathlete will be much higher than that of an ordinary man.During each cardiac cycle two prominent sounds are produced whichcan be easily heard through a stethoscope. The first heart sound (lub) isassociated with the closure of the tricuspid and bicuspid valves whereasthe second heart sound (dub) is associated with the closure of thesemilunar valves. These sounds are of clinical diagnostic significance.18.3.3Electrocardiograph (ECG)You are probably familiar with this scene from a typical hospital televisionshow: A patient is hooked up to a monitoring machine that shows voltage
traces on a screen and makes the sound ﬁ... pip... pip... pip.....
peeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeﬂ as the patient goes into cardiac arrest. This type
of machine (electro-cardiograph) is used to obtain an electrocardiogram
(ECG). ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the
heart during a cardiac cycle. To obtain a standard ECG (as shown in the
