PLANT KINGDOM29In the previous chapter, we looked at the broad classification of livingorganisms under the system proposed by Whittaker (1969) wherein hesuggested the Five Kingdom classification viz. Monera, Protista, Fungi,Animalia and Plantae.  In this chapter, we will deal in detail with further
classification within Kingdom Plantae popularly known as the ‚plantkingdom™.We must stress here that our understanding of the plant kingdomhas changed over time. Fungi, and members of the Monera and Protista
having cell walls have now been excluded from Plantae though earlierclassifications placed them in the same kingdom.  So, the cyanobacteria
that are also referred to as blue green algae are not ‚algae™ any more.  Inthis chapter, we will describe Plantae under Algae, Bryophytes,Pteridophytes, Gymnosperms and Angiosperms.Let us also look at classification within angiosperms to understandsome of the concerns  that influenced the classification systems. The
earliest systems of classification used only gross superficial morphological
characters such as habit, colour, number and shape of leaves, etc.  Theywere based mainly on vegetative characters or on the androeciumstructure (system given by Linnaeus). Such systems were artificial; theyseparated the closely related species since they were based on a fewcharacteristics. Also, the artificial systems gave equal weightage tovegetative and sexual characteristics; this is not acceptable since we know
that often the vegetative characters are more easily affected byenvironment. As against this, natural classification systems developed,which were based on natural affinities among the organisms and consider,PLANT KINGDOMCHAPTER  33.1Algae3.2Bryophytes3.3Pteridophytes3.4Gymnosperms3.5Angiosperms3.6Plant Life Cyclesand Alternationof Generations
30BIOLOGYnot only the external features, but also internal features, like ultra-structure, anatomy, embryology and phytochemistry. Such a
classification for flowering plants was given by George Bentham andJoseph Dalton Hooker.At present phylogenetic classification systems based onevolutionary relationships between the various organisms are acceptable.
This assumes that organisms belonging to the same taxa have a commonancestor.   We now use information from many other sources too to help
resolve difficulties in classification.  These become more important whenthere is no supporting fossil evidence.  Numerical Taxonomy which isnow easily carried out using computers is based on all observablecharacteristics. Number and codes are assigned to all the characters and
the data are then processed. In this way each character is given equalimportance and at the same time hundreds of characters can be
considered.  Cytotaxonomy that is based on cytological information likechromosome number, structure, behaviour and chemotaxonomy that
uses the chemical constituents of the plant to resolve confusions, are also
used by taxonomists these days.3.1ALGAEAlgae are chlorophyll-bearing, simple, thalloid, autotrophic and largelyaquatic (both fresh water and marine) organisms. They occur in a varietyof other habitats: moist stones, soils and wood. Some of them also occurin association with fungi (lichen) and animals (e.g., on sloth bear).The form and size of algae is highly variable (Figure 3.1). The sizeranges from the microscopic unicellular forms like Chlamydomonas, to
colonial forms like Volvox and to the filamentous forms like Ulothrix andSpirogyra. A few of the marine forms such as kelps, form massive plantbodies.The algae reproduce by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.Vegetative reproduction is by fragmentation. Each fragment develops intoa thallus. Asexual reproduction is by the production of different types ofspores, the most common being the zoospores. They are flagellated(motile) and on germination gives rise to new plants. Sexual reproductiontakes place through fusion of two gametes. These gametes can beflagellated and similar in size (as in Chlamydomonas) or non-flagellated
(non-motile) but similar in size (as in Spirogyra). Such reproduction iscalled isogamous. Fusion of two gametes dissimilar in size, as in somespecies of Chlamydomonas is termed as anisogamous. Fusion betweenone large, non-motile (static) female gamete and a smaller, motile male
gamete is termed oogamous, e.g., Volvox, Fucus.
PLANT KINGDOM31Figure 3.1  Algae :(a) Green algae (i) Volvox (ii) Chlamydomonas (iii) Chara(b) Brown algae  (i) Laminaria (ii) Fucus (iii) Dictyota(c)  Red algae (i)  Porphyra (ii) Polysiphonia(a-i)(c-i)(c-ii)(a-iii)Frond
Main axisBranchesParent
colonyFlagella(b-i)(b-ii)(b-iii)Frond
StipeHoldfastAir bladderMidribHoldfastFrond
StipeFrond
DaughtercolonyBranchesAxis(a-ii)
32BIOLOGYAlgae are useful to man in a variety of ways. At least a half of the totalcarbon dioxide fixation on earth is carried out by algae throughphotosynthesis. Being photosynthetic they increase the level of dissolved
oxygen in their immediate environment. They are of paramountimportance as primary producers of energy-rich compounds which formthe basis of the food cycles of all aquatic animals. Many species of Porphyra,Laminaria and Sargassum  are among the 70 species of marine algaeused as food. Certain marine brown and red algae produce large amounts
of hydrocolloids (water holding substances), e.g., algin (brown algae) andcarrageen (red algae) which are used commercially. Agar, one of thecommercial products obtained from Gelidium and Gracilaria are used togrow microbes and in preparations of ice-creams and jellies. Chlorella aunicellular alga, rich in proteins is used as food supplement even byspace travellers. The algae are divided into three main classes:Chlorophyceae, Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.3.1.1ChlorophyceaeThe members of chlorophyceae are commonly called green algae. Theplant body may be unicellular, colonial or filamentous. They are usually
grass green due to the dominance of pigments chlorophyll a and b. Thepigments are localised in definite chloroplasts. The chloroplasts may be
discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon-shaped in
different species. Most of the members have one or more storage bodiescalled pyrenoids located in the chloroplasts. Pyrenoids contain proteinbesides starch. Some algae may store food in the form of oil droplets.
Green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made of an inner layer of celluloseand an outer layer of pectose.Vegetative reproduction usually takes place by fragmentation or byformation of different types of spores. Asexual reproduction is by
flagellated zoospores produced in zoosporangia. The sexual reproductionshows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells and it
may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous. Some commonly foundgreen algae are: Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ulothrix, Spirogyra and Chara(Figure 3.1a).3.1.2PhaeophyceaeThe members of phaeophyceae or brown algae are found primarily inmarine habitats. They show great variation in size and form. They rangefrom simple branched, filamentous forms (Ectocarpus) to profuselybranched forms as represented by kelps, which may reach a height of
100 metres. They possess chlorophyll a, c, carotenoids and xanthophylls.They vary in colour from olive green to various shades of brown dependingupon the amount of the xanthophyll pigment, fucoxanthin present in
PLANT KINGDOM33them. Food is stored as complex carbohydrates, which may be in theform of laminarin or mannitol. The vegetative cells have a cellulosic wallusually covered on the outside by a gelatinous coating of algin. Theprotoplast contains, in addition to plastids, a centrally located vacuoleand nucleus. The plant body is usually attached to the substratum by aholdfast, and has a stalk, the stipe and leaf like photosynthetic organ Œthe frond. Vegetative reproduction takes place by fragmentation. Asexualreproduction in most brown algae is by biflagellate zoospores that arepear-shaped and have two unequal laterally attached flagella.Sexual reproduction may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous.Union of gametes may take place in water or within the oogonium
(oogamous species). The gametes are pyriform (pear-shaped) and bear
two laterally attached flagella. The common forms are Ectocarpus, Dictyota,Laminaria, Sargassum and Fucus (Figure 3.1b).3.1.3RhodophyceaeThe members of rhodophyceae are commonly called red algae because ofthe predominance of the red pigment, r-phycoerythrin in their body. Majority
of the red algae are marine with greater concentrations found in the warmer
areas. They occur in both well-lighted regions close to the surface of waterand also at great depths in oceans where relatively little light penetrates.The red thalli of most of the red algae are  multicellular. Some of themhave complex body organisation. The food is stored as floridean starch
which is very similar to amylopectin and glycogen in structure.The red algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation. Theyreproduce asexually by non-motile spores and sexually by non-motileTABLE 3.1 Divisions of Algae and their Main CharacteristicsClassesCommonMajorStoredCell WallFlagellarHabitatNamePigmentsFoodNumber andPosition ofInsertionsChlorophyceaeGreenChlorophyllStarchCellulose2-8, equal,Fresh water,algaea, bapicalbrackish water,salt waterPhaeophyceaeBrownChlorophyllMannitol,Cellulose2, unequal,Fresh wateralgaea, c,laminarinand alginlateral(rare) brackishfucoxanthinwater, saltwaterRhodophyceaeRedChlorophyllFlorideanCellulose,AbsentFresh wateralgaea, d,starchpectin and(some),phycoerythrinpolybrackishsulphatewater, saltesterswater (most)
34BIOLOGYgametes. Sexual reproduction is oogamous and accompanied by complexpost fertilisation developments. The common members are: Polysiphonia,Porphyra (Figure 3.1c), Gracilaria and Gelidium.3.2BRYOPHYTESBryophytes include the various mosses and liverworts that are foundcommonly growing in moist shaded areas in the hills (Figure 3.2).Archegoniophore
(a)(b)(c)(d)Antheridiophore
CapsuleAntheridialbranchBranchesArchegonial
branchSetaSporophyte
GametophyteLeavesMain axisRhizoidsGemma cupRhizoidsGemma cupRhizoidsFigure 3.2Bryophytes: A liverwort Œ Marchantia (a) Female thallus  (b) Male thallusMosses Œ  (c) Funaria, gametophyte and sporophyte  (d) Sphagnumgametophyte
PLANT KINGDOM35Bryophytes are also called amphibians of the plant kingdom becausethese plants can live in soil but are dependent on water for sexualreproduction. They usually occur in damp, humid and shaded localities.
They play an important role in plant succession on bare rocks/soil.The plant body of bryophytes is more differentiated than that of algae.It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect, and attached to the substratum
by unicellular or multicellular rhizoids. They lack true roots, stem orleaves. They may possess root-like, leaf-like or stem-like structures. Themain plant body of the bryophyte is haploid. It produces gametes, hence
is called a gametophyte. The sex organs in bryophytes are multicellular.The male sex organ is called antheridium. They produce biflagellateantherozoids. The female sex organ called archegonium is flask-shapedand produces a single egg. The antherozoids are released into water wherethey come in contact with archegonium. An antherozoid fuses with theegg to produce the zygote. Zygotes do not undergo reduction division
immediately. They produce a multicellular body called a sporophyte.The sporophyte is not free-living but attached to the photosynthetic
gametophyte and derives nourishment from it. Some cells of the
sporophyte undergo reduction division (meiosis) to produce haploidspores.  These spores germinate to produce gametophyte.Bryophytes in general are of little economic importance but somemosses provide food for herbaceous mammals, birds and other animals.
Species of Sphagnum, a moss, provide peat that have long been used asfuel,  and as packing material for trans-shipment of living material becauseof their capacity to hold water. Mosses along with lichens are the firstorganisms to colonise rocks and hence, are of great ecological importance.They decompose rocks making the substrate suitable for the growth of
higher plants. Since mosses form dense mats on the soil, they reduce theimpact of falling rain and prevent soil erosion. The bryophytes are dividedinto liverworts and mosses.3.2.1LiverwortsThe liverworts grow usually in moist, shady habitats such as banks of
streams, marshy ground, damp soil, bark of trees and deep in the woods.
The plant body of a liverwort is thalloid, e.g., Marchantia. The thallus isdorsiventral and closely appressed to the substrate. The leafy members
have tiny leaf-like appendages in two rows on the stem-like structures.Asexual reproduction in liverworts takes place by fragmentation ofthalli, or by the formation of specialised structures called gemmae(sing. gemma). Gemmae are green, multicellular, asexual buds, which
develop in small receptacles  called gemma cups located on the thalli.The gemmae become detached from the parent body and germinate toform new individuals. During sexual reproduction, male and female sex
36BIOLOGYorgans are produced either on the same or on different thalli. Thesporophyte is differentiated into a foot, seta and capsule. After meiosis,spores are produced within the capsule. These spores germinate to form
free-living gametophytes.3.2.2MossesThe predominant stage of the life cycle of a moss is the gametophyte whichconsists of two stages. The first stage is the protonema stage, whichdevelops directly from a spore. It is a creeping, green, branched and
frequently filamentous stage. The second stage is the leafy stage, whichdevelops from the secondary protonema as a lateral bud. They consist ofupright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. They are attachedto the soil through multicellular and branched rhizoids. This stage bears
the sex organs.Vegetative reproduction in mosses is by fragmentation and buddingin the secondary protonema. In sexual reproduction, the sex organs
antheridia and archegonia are produced at the apex of the leafy shoots.After fertilisation, the zygote develops into a sporophyte, consisting of afoot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte in mosses is more elaborate than
that in liverworts. The capsule contains spores. Spores are formed aftermeiosis. The mosses have an elaborate mechanism of spore dispersal.Common examples of mosses are Funaria, Polytrichum and Sphagnum(Figure 3.2).3.3PTERIDOPHYTESThe Pteridophytes include horsetails and ferns. Pteridophytes are used
for medicinal purposes and as soil-binders. They are also frequently grownas ornamentals. Evolutionarily, they are the first terrestrial plants topossess vascular tissues Œ xylem and phloem. You shall study more about
these tissues in Chapter 6. The pteridophytes are found in cool, damp,shady places though some may flourish well in sandy-soil conditions.You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the lifecycle is the gametophytic plant body. However, in pteridophytes, the
main plant body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root,stem and leaves (Figure 3.3). These organs possess well-differentiated
vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are small (microphylls) asin Selaginella or large (macrophylls) as in ferns. The sporophytes bearsporangia that are subtended by leaf-like appendages calledsporophylls. In some cases sporophylls may form distinct compactstructures called strobili or cones (Selaginella, Equisetum). Thesporangia produce spores by meiosis in spore mother cells. The spores
germinate to give rise to inconspicuous, small but multicellular,
PLANT KINGDOM37Figure 3.3  Pteridophytes :  (a) Selaginella  (b) Equisetum  (c) Fern (d) SalviniaStrobilus
NodeInternode
BranchRhizome(b)(c)(d)
38BIOLOGYfree-living, mostly photosynthetic thalloid gametophytes calledprothallus. These gametophytes require cool, damp, shady places togrow. Because of this specific restricted requirement and the need forwater for fertilisation, the spread of living pteridophytes is limited andrestricted to narrow geographical regions. The gametophytes bear maleand female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia, respectively.Water is required for transfer of antherozoids Œ the male gametes releasedfrom the antheridia, to the mouth of archegonium. Fusion of male gametewith the egg present in the archegonium result in the formation of zygote.
Zygote thereafter produces a multicellular well-differentiated sporophytewhich is the dominant phase of the pteridophytes. In majority of thepteridophytes all the spores are of similar kinds; such plants are called
homosporous. Genera like Selaginella and Salvinia which producetwo kinds of spores, macro (large) and micro (small) spores, are known
as heterosporous. The megaspores and microspores germinate and giverise to female and male gametophytes, respectively. The femalegametophytes in these plants are retained on the parent sporophytesfor variable periods. The development of the zygotes into young embryostake place within the female gametophytes. This event is a precursor tothe seed habit considered an important step in evolution.The pteridophytes are further classified into four classes: Psilopsida(Psilotum); Lycopsida (Selaginella, Lycopodium), Sphenopsida (Equisetum)and Pteropsida (Dryopteris, Pteris, Adiantum).3.4GYMNOSPERMSThe gymnosperms (gymnos : naked, sperma : seeds) are plants in whichthe ovules are not enclosed by any ovary wall and remain exposed, both
before and after fertilisation. The seeds that develop post-fertilisation, are
not covered, i.e., are naked. Gymnosperms include medium-sized treesor tall trees and shrubs (Figure 3.4). One of the gymnosperms, the giantredwood tree Sequoia is one of the tallest tree species. The roots aregenerally tap roots. Roots in some genera have fungal association in theform of mycorrhiza (Pinus), while in some others (Cycas) small specialisedroots called coralloid roots are associated with N2- fixing cyanobacteria.The stems are unbranched (Cycas) or branched (Pinus, Cedrus). The leavesmay be simple or compound. In Cycas the pinnate leaves persist for a fewyears. The leaves in gymnosperms are well-adapted to withstand extremesof temperature, humidity and wind. In conifers, the needle-like leavesreduce the surface area. Their thick cuticle and sunken stomata alsohelp to reduce water loss.
PLANT KINGDOM39The gymnosperms are heterosporous; they producehaploid microspores and megaspores. The two kinds ofspores are produced within sporangia that are borne on
sporophylls which are arranged spirally along an axis toform lax or compact strobili or cones. The strobili bearingmicrosporophylls and microsporangia are calledmicrosporangiate or male strobili. The microsporesdevelop into a male gametophytic generation which ishighly reduced and is confined to only a limited number
of cells. This reduced gametophyte is called a pollengrain. The development of pollen grains take place withinthe microsporangia. The cones bearing megasporophylls
with ovules or megasporangia are calledmacrosporangiate or female strobili. The male or femalecones or strobili may be borne on the same tree (Pinus).However, in cycas male cones and megasporophylls areborne on different trees. The megaspore mother cell is
differentiated from one of the cells of the nucellus. The
nucellus is protected by envelopes and the compositestructure is called an ovule. The ovules are borne onmegasporophylls which may be clustered to form thefemale cones. The megaspore mother cell dividesmeiotically to form four megaspores. One of themegaspores enclosed within the megasporangiumdevelops into a multicellular  female gametophyte thatbears two or more archegonia or female sex organs. Themulticellular female gametophyte is also retained withinmegasporangium.Unlike bryophytes and pteridophytes, ingymnosperms the male and the female gametophytes
do not have an independent free-living existence. Theyremain within the sporangia retained on thesporophytes. The pollen grain is released from the
microsporangium. They are carried in air currents andcome in contact with the opening of the ovules borneon megasporophylls. The pollen tube carrying the male
gametes grows towards archegonia in the ovules anddischarge their contents near the mouth of thearchegonia. Following fertilisation, zygote develops into
an embryo and the ovules into seeds. These seeds arenot covered.(c)Figure 3.4Gymnosperms: (a) Cycas(b) Pinus (c) GinkgoSeedsDwarf
shootLong
shootDwarf ShootLong ShootSeeds(b)(a)
40BIOLOGY3.5ANGIOSPERMSUnlike the gymnosperms where the ovules are naked, in the angiospermsor flowering plants, the pollen grains and ovules are developed in  specialised
structures called flowers. In angiosperms, the seeds are enclosed by fruits.The angiosperms are an exceptionally large group of plants occurring inwide range of habitats. They range in size from tiny, almost microscopic
Wolfia to tall trees of Eucalyptus (over 100 metres). They provide us withfood, fodder,  fuel, medicines and several other commercially important
products. They are divided into two classes : the dicotyledons and themonocotyledons (Figure 3.5). The dicotyledons are characterised byhaving two cotyledons in their seeds while the monocolyledons have only
one. The male sex organ in a flower is the stamen. Each stamen consists of
a slender filament with an anther at the tip. The anthers, following meiosis,produce pollen grains. The female sex organ in a flower is the pistil or the
carpel. Pistil consists of an ovary enclosing one to many ovules. Within
ovules are present highly reduced female gametophytes termed embryo-sacs. The embryo-sac formation is preceded by meiosis. Hence, each of thecells of an embryo-sac is haploid. Each embryo-sac has a three-celled eggapparatus Œ one egg cell and two synergids, three antipodal cells andtwo polar nuclei. The polar nuclei eventually fuse to produce a diploidsecondary nucleus. Pollen grain, after dispersal from the anthers, are carried
by wind or various other agencies to the stigma of a pistil. This is termed as(b)(a)Figure 3.5Angiosperms : (a) A dicotyledon (b) A monocotyledon
PLANT KINGDOM41pollination. The pollen grains germinate on the stigma and the resultingpollen tubes grow through the tissues of stigma and style and reach theovule. The pollen tubes enter the embryo-sac where two male gametes are
discharged. One of the male gametes fuses with the egg cell to form a zygote(syngamy). The other male gamete fuses with the diploid secondary nucleusto produce the triploid primary endosperm nucleus (PEN). Because of the
involvement of two fusions, this event is termed as double fertilisation,an event unique to angiosperms. The zygote develops into an embryo (with
one or two cotyledons) and the PEN develops into endosperm which provides
nourishment to  the developing embryo. The synergids and antipodalsdegenerate after fertilisation. During these events the ovules develop intoseeds and the ovaries develop into fruit. The life cycle of an angiosperm isshown in Figure 3.6.Figure 3.6  Life cycle of an angiosperm
42BIOLOGY3.6 PLANT LIFE CYCLES AND ALTERNATION OFGENERATIONSIn plants, both haploid and diploid cells can divide bymitosis. This ability leads to the formation of differentplant  bodies - haploid and diploid. The haploid plantbody produces gametes by mitosis. This plant body
represents a gametophyte. Following fertilisation the
zygote also divides by mitosis to produce a diploid
sporophytic plant body. Haploid spores are produced
by this plant body by meiosis. These in turn, divide bymitosis to form a haploid plant body once again. Thus,during the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant,
there is an alternation of generations between gamete
producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing
diploid sporophyte.However, different plant groups, as well as individualsrepresenting them, differ in the following patterns:
1.Sporophytic generation is represented only by the
one-celled zygote. There are no free-living
sporophytes. Meiosis in the zygote results in the
formation of haploid spores. The haploid spores
divide mitotically and form the gametophyte. Thedominant, photosynthetic phase in such plants isthe free-living gametophyte. This kind of life cycle
is termed as haplontic. Many algae such as Volvox,Spirogyra and some species of Chlamydomonasrepresent this pattern (Figure 3.7 a).2.On the other extreme, is the type wherein the diploidsporophyte is the dominant, photosynthetic,independent phase of the plant. The gametophytic
phase is represented by the single to few-celled
haploid gametophyte. This kind of life cycle is
termed as diplontic. An alga, Fucus sp., representsthis pattern (Fig. 3.7b). In addition, all seed bearingplants i.e., gymnosperms and angiosperms, followthis pattern with some variations, wherein, the
gametophytic phase is few to multi-celled.3.Bryophytes and pteridophytes, interestingly, exhibit
an intermediate condition (Haplo-diplontic); bothphases are multicellular. However, they differ in theirdominant phases.SyngamyZygote(2n)Spores
(n)HaplonticABGametogenesisMeiosisGametophyte(n)(a)BAHaplo-diplonticSpores
(n)MeiosisGametophyte(n)SyngamyZygote(2n)GametogenesisSporophyte
(2n)(c)Figure 3.7Life cycle patterns : (a) Haplontic(b) Diplontic  (c) Haplo-diplontic
PLANT KINGDOM43SUMMARYPlant kingdom includes algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms andangiosperms. Algae are chlorophyll-bearing simple, thalloid, autotrophic andlargely aquatic organisms. Depending on the type of pigment possesed and thetype of stored food, algae are classfied into three classes, namely Chlorophyceae,
Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae. Algae usually reproduce vegetatively byfragmentation, asexually by formation of different types of spores and sexually byformation of gametes which may show isogamy, anisogamy or oogamy.Bryophytes are plants which can live in soil but are dependent on water forsexual reproduction. Their plant body is more differentiated than that of algae. It
is thallus-like and prostrate or erect and attached to the substratum by rhizoids.
They possess root-like, leaf-like and stem-like structures. The bryophytes aredivided into liverworts and mosses. The plant body of liverworts is thalloid anddorsiventral whereas mosses have upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged
leaves. The main plant body of a bryophyte is gamete-producing and is called agametophyte. It bears the male sex organs called antheridia  and female sex organscalled archegonia. The male and female gametes produced fuse to form zygote
which produces a multicellular body called a sporophyte. It produces haploidspores. The spores germinate to form gametophytes.In pteridophytes the main plant is a sporophyte which is differentiated intotrue root, stem and leaves. These organs possess well-differentiated vascular
tissues. The sporophytes bear sporangia which produce spores. The sporesgerminate to form  gametophytes which require cool, damp places to grow. The
gametophytes bear male and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia,respectively. Water is required for transfer of male gametes to archegonium wherezygote is formed after fertilisation. The zygote produces a sporophyte.A dominant, independent, photosynthetic, thalloid or erect phase isrepresented by a haploid gametophyte and it alternates with the short-
lived multicelluler sporophyte totally or partially dependent on the
gametophyte for its anchorage and nutrition. All bryophytes representthis pattern.The diploid sporophyte is represented by a dominant, independent,photosynthetic, vascular plant body. It alternates with multicellular,
saprophytic/autotrophic, independent but short-lived haploidgametophyte. Such a pattern is known as haplo-diplontic life cycle. All
pteridophytes exhibit this pattern (Figure 3.7 c).Interestingly, while most algal genera are haplontic, some of themsuch as Ectocarpus, Polysiphonia, kelps are haplo-diplontic. Fucus, analga is diplontic.
44BIOLOGYThe gymnosperms are the plants in which ovules are not enclosed by anyovary wall. After fertilisation the seeds remain exposed and therefore these plantsare called naked-seeded plants. The gymnosperms produce microspores and
megaspores which are produced in microsporangia and megasporangia borne onthe sporophylls. The sporophylls Œ microsporophylls and megasporophylls Œ arearranged spirally on axis to form male and female cones, respectively. The pollen
grain germinates and pollen tube releases the male gamete into the ovule, where itfuses with the egg cell in archegonia. Following fertilisation, the zygote developsinto embryo and the ovules into seeds.In angiosperms, the male sex organs (stamen) and female sex organs (pistil)are borne in a flower. Each stamen consists of a filament and an anther. The anther
produces pollen grains (male gametophyte) after meiosis. The pistil consists of an
ovary enclosing one to many ovules. Within the ovule is the female gametophyteor embryo sac which contains the egg cell. The pollen tube enters the embryo-sacwhere two male gametes are discharged. One male gamete fuses with egg cell
(syngamy) and other fuses with diploid secondary nucleus (triple fusion). Thisphenomenon of two fusions is called double fertilisation and is unique toangiosperms. The angiosperms are divided into two classes Œ the dicotyledons
and the monocotyledons.During the life cycle of any sexually reproducing plant, there is alternation ofgenerations between gamete producing haploid gametophyte and spore producing
diploid sporophyte. However, different plant groups as well as individuals mayshow different patterns of life cycles Œ haplontic, diplontic or intermediate.EXERCISES1.What is the basis of classification of algae?2.When and where does reduction division take place in the life cycle of a liverwort,a moss, a fern, a gymnosperm and an angiosperm?3.Name three groups of plants that bear archegonia. Briefly describe the life cycleof any one of them.4.Mention the ploidy of the following: protonemal cell of a moss; primary endospermnucleus in dicot, leaf cell of a moss; prothallus cell of a ferm; gemma cell in
Marchantia; meristem cell of monocot, ovum of a liverwort, and zygote of a fern.5.Write a note on economic importance of algae and gymnosperms.6.Both gymnosperms and angiosperms bear seeds, then why are they classifiedseparately?7.What is heterospory? Briefly comment on its significance. Give two examples.
PLANT KINGDOM458.Explain briefly the following terms with suitable examples:-(i)protonema(ii)antheridium(iii)archegonium(iv)diplontic(v)sporophyll(vi)isogamy9.Differentiate between the following:-(i)red algae and brown algae(ii)liverworts and moss(iii)homosporous and heterosporous pteridophyte(iv)syngamy and triple fusion10.How would you distinguish monocots from dicots?11.Match the following (column I with column II)Column IColumn II(a) Chlamydomonas(i)Moss(b) Cycas(ii)Pteridophyte(c) Selaginella(iii)Algae(d)  Sphagnum(iv)Gymnosperm12.Describe the important characteristics of gymnosperms.
