UNIT 2The description of the diverse forms of life on earth was made only byobservation Œ through naked eyes or later through magnifying lenses
and microscopes. This description is mainly of gross structural features,
both external and internal. In addition, observable and perceivable
living phenomena were also recorded as part of this description. Before
experimental biology or more specifically, physiology, was established
as a part of biology, naturalists described only biology. Hence, biology
remained as a natural history for a long time. The description, by itself,
was amazing in terms of detail. While the initial reaction of a student
could be boredom, one should keep in mind  that the detailed description,
was utilised in the later day reductionist biology where living processes
drew more attention from scientists than the description of life forms
and their structure. Hence, this description became meaningful and
helpful in framing research questions in physiology or evolutionary
biology. In the following chapters of this unit, the structural organisation
of plants and animals, including the structural basis of physiologial or
behavioural phenomena, is described. For convenience, this description
of morphological and anatomical features is presented separately for
plants and animals.STRUCTURAL ORGANISATIONIN PLANTS AND ANIMALSChapter 5Morphology of
Flowering PlantsChapter 6Anatomy of Flowering
PlantsChapter 7Structural Organisation in
Animals
KATHERINE ESAU was born in Ukraine in 1898. She  studiedagriculture in Russia and Germany and received her doctoratein 1931 in United States. She reported in her early publications
that the curly top virus spreads through a plant via the food-
conducting or phloem tissue. Dr Esau™s Plant Anatomy publishedin 1954 took a dynamic, developmental approach designed to
enhance one™s understanding of plant structure and an
enormous impact worldwide, literally bringing about a revival
of the discipline. The Anatomy of Seed Plants by Katherine Esauwas published in 1960. It was referred to as Webster™s of plant
biology Œ it is encyclopediac. In 1957 she was elected to the
National Academy of Sciences, becoming the sixth woman to
receive that honour. In addition to this prestigious award, she
received the National Medal of Science from President George
Bush in 1989.When Katherine Esau died in the year 1997, Peter Raven,director of Anatomy and Morphology, Missouri Botanical
Garden, remembered that she  ‚absolutely dominated™ the field
of plant biology even at the age of 99.Katherine Esau(1898 Œ 1997)
The wide range in the structure of higher plants will never fail to fascinateus. Even though the angiosperms show such a large diversity in external
structure or morphology, they are all characterised by presence of roots,stems, leaves, flowers and fruits.In chapters 2 and 3, we talked about classification of plants basedon morphological and other characteristics. For any successful attempt
at classification and at understanding any higher plant (or for that
matter any living organism) we need to know standard technical terms
and  standard definitions. We also need to know about the possible
variations in different parts, found as adaptations of the plants to their
environment, e.g., adaptions to various habitats, for protection,climbing, storage, etc.If you pull out any weed you will see that all of them have roots, stemsand leaves. They may be bearing flowers and fruits. The underground
part of the flowering plant is the root system while the portion above the
ground  forms the shoot system (Figure 5.1).5.1THE ROOTIn majority of the dicotyledonous plants, the direct elongation of the radicleleads to the formation of primary root which grows inside the soil.
It bears lateral roots of several orders that are referred to as secondary,
tertiary, etc. roots. The primary roots and its branches constitute theMORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTSCHAPTER  55.1The Root5.2 The Stem5.3The Leaf5.4The Inflorescence5.5The Flower5.6The Fruit5.7The Seed5.8Semi-technical
Description of a
Typical
Flowering Plant5.9Description of
Some Important
Families
66BIOLOGYFlowerShootsystemRoot
systemFruitBudStemLeafNodeInternode
Primary
root
Secondary
root
{Figure 5.2 Different types of roots : (a) Tap  (b) Fibrous  (c) Adventitious(c)(b)Figure 5.1  Parts of a flowering plantFibrous rootsAdventitious rootsLaterals(a)Main roottap root system, as seen in the mustardplant (Figure 5.2a). In monocotyledonousplants, the primary root is short lived andis replaced by a large number of roots.
These roots originate from the base of the
stem and constitute the fibrous rootsystem, as seen in the wheat plant (Figure5.2b). In some plants, like grass,Monstera and the banyan tree, roots arisefrom parts of the plant other than theradicle and are called adventitious roots(Figure 5.2c). The main functions of the
root system are absorption of water and
minerals from the soil, providing a properanchorage to the plant parts, storingreserve food material and synthesis of
plant growth regulators.
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS675.1.1Regions of the RootThe root is covered at the apex by a thimble-likestructure called the root cap (Figure 5.3). Itprotects the tender apex of the root as it makes
its way through the soil. A few millimetres above
the root cap is the region of meristematicactivity.  The cells of this region are very small,thin-walled and with dense protoplasm. They
divide repeatedly. The cells proximal to thisregion undergo rapid elongation andenlargement and are responsible for the growth
of the root in length. This region is called theregion of elongation. The cells of the elongationzone gradually differentiate and mature. Hence,this zone, proximal to region of elongation, iscalled the region of maturation.  From thisregion some of the epidermal cells form very fineand delicate, thread-like structures called roothairs. These root hairs absorb water andminerals from the soil.5.1.2Modifications of RootRoots in some plants change their shape andstructure and become modified to perform
functions other than absorption and
conduction of water and minerals. They are
modified for support, storage of food and
respiration (Figure 5.4 and 5.5). Tap roots ofcarrot, turnip and adventitious roots of sweetpotato, get swollen and store food. Can you give
some more such examples? Have you ever
wondered what those hanging structures that
support a banyan tree are? These are called
prop roots. Similarly, the stems of maize andsugarcane have supporting roots coming out
of the lower nodes of the stem. These are called
stilt roots. In some plants such as Rhizophora
growing in swampy areas, many roots come out
of the ground and grow vertically upwards.
Such roots, called pneumatophores, help toget oxygen for respiration.Figure 5.3  The regions of the root-tipFigure 5.4Modification of root for support:Banyan tree
68BIOLOGY5.2THE STEMWhat are the features that distinguish a stem from a root? The stem is theascending part of the axis bearing branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. It
develops from the plumule of the embryo of a germinating seed. The stem
bears nodes and internodes. The region of the stem where leaves areborn are called nodes while internodes are the portions between two nodes.The stem bears buds, which may be terminal or axillary. Stem is generallygreen when young and later often become woody and dark brown.The main function of the stem is spreading out branches bearingleaves, flowers and fruits. It conducts water, minerals and photosynthates.
Some stems perform the function of storage of food, support, protection
and of vegetative propagation.5.2.1Modifications of StemThe stem may not always be typically like what they are expected to be.They are modified to perform different functions (Figure 5.6). Undergroundstems of potato, ginger, turmeric, zaminkand, Colocasia are modified tostore food in them. They also act as organs of perennation to tide overconditions unfavourable for growth. Stem tendrils which develop fromaxillary buds, are slender and spirally coiled and help plants to climbsuch as in gourds (cucumber, pumpkins, watermelon) and grapevines.Axillary buds of stems may also get modified into woody, straight andpointed thorns. Thorns are found in many  plants such as Citrus,Bougainvillea. They protect plants from browsing animals. Some plantsof arid regions modify their stems into flattened (Opuntia), or fleshycylindrical (Euphorbia) structures. They contain chlorophyll and carryFigure 5.5Modification of root for : (a) storage (b) respiration: pneumatophore inRhizophora(b)(a)CarrotTurnipSweetpotatoAsparagus
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS69Figure 5.6Modifications of stem for :  (a) storage  (b) support  (c) protection(d) spread and vegetative propagation(a)(b)(c)(d)Stem modifiedinto tendrilRoots arisingfrom nodesStem modifiedinto spineout photosynthesis. Underground stems of some plants such as grassand strawberry, etc., spread to new niches and when older parts die newplants are formed. In plants like mint and jasmine a slender lateral branch
arises from the base of the main axis and after growing aerially for sometime arch downwards to touch the ground. A lateral branch with shortinternodes and  each node bearing a rosette of leaves and a tuft of roots is
found in aquatic plants like Pistia and Eichhornia.  In banana, pineappleand Chrysanthemum, the lateral branches originate from the basal andunderground portion of the main stem, grow horizontally beneath the
soil and then come out obliquely upward giving rise to leafy shoots.5.3THE LEAFThe leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. Itdevelops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud laterdevelops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems andare arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetativeorgans for photosynthesis.A typical leaf consists of three main parts:  leaf base, petiole and lamina(Figure 5.7 a). The leaf is attached to the stem by the leaf base and may
70BIOLOGYbear two lateral small leaf like structures calledstipules. In monocotyledons, the leaf base expandsinto a sheath covering the stem partially or wholly.In some leguminous plants the leafbase may
become swollen, which is called the pulvinus. Thepetiole help hold the blade to light. Long thin flexiblepetioles allow leaf blades to flutter in wind, thereby
cooling the leaf and bringing fresh air to leaf surface.The lamina or the leaf blade is the green expandedpart of the leaf with veins and veinlets. There is,usually, a middle prominent vein, which is knownas the midrib. Veins provide rigidity to the leaf bladeand act as channels of transport for water, minerals
and food materials. The shape, margin, apex, surfaceand extent of incision of lamina varies in differentleaves.5.3.1VenationThe arrangement of veins and the veinlets in thelamina of leaf is termed as venation. When theveinlets form a network, the venation is termed asreticulate (Figure 5.7 b). When the veins runparallel to each other within a lamina, the venation
is termed as parallel (Figure 5.7 c). Leaves ofdicotyledonous plants generally possess reticulatevenation, while parallel venation is the characteristicof most monocotyledons.5.3.2Types of LeavesA leaf is said to be simple, when its lamina is entireor when incised, the incisions do not touch themidrib. When the incisions of the lamina reach up
to the midrib breaking it into a number of leaflets,
the leaf is called compound. A bud is presentin the axil of petiole in both simple and compound
leaves, but not in the axil of leaflets of the compoundleaf.The compound leaves may be of two types(Figure 5.8). In a pinnately compound leaf anumber of leaflets are present on a common axis,the rachis, which represents the midrib of the leafas in neem.Figure 5.7Structure of a leaf :(a) Parts of a leaf
(b) Reticulate venation
(c) Parallel venation(b)(c)(b)(a)LaminaPetioleStipuleLeafbaseAxillarybud(a)Figure 5.8Compound leaves :(a) pinnately compound leaf
(b) palmately compound leaf
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS71In palmately compound leaves, theleaflets are attached at a common point, i.e.,at the tip of petiole, as in silk cotton.5.3.3Phyllotaxy
Phyllotaxy is the pattern of arrangement ofleaves on the stem or branch. This is usuallyof three types Œ alternate, opposite andwhorled (Figure 5.9). In alternate type ofphyllotaxy,  a single leaf arises at each nodein alternate manner, as in china rose,
mustard and sun flower plants. In oppositetype, a pair of leaves arise at each node andlie opposite to each other as in Calotropisand guava plants. If more than two leaves
arise at a node and form a whorl, it is called
whorled, as in Alstonia.5.3.4Modifications of LeavesLeaves are often modified to performfunctions other than photosynthesis. Theyare converted into tendrils for climbing asin peas or into spines for defence as in cacti(Figure 5.10 a, b). The fleshy leaves of onion
and garlic store food (Figure 5.10c). In some
plants such as Australian acacia, the leavesare small and short-lived. The petioles inthese plants expand, become green and
synthesise food. Leaves of certaininsectivorous plants such as pitcher plant,venus-fly trap are also modified leaves.5.4THE INFLORESCENCEA flower is a modified shoot wherein the shootapical meristem changes to floral meristem.Internodes do not elongate and the axis gets
condensed. The apex produces differentkinds of floral appendages laterally atsuccessive nodes instead of leaves.  When a
shoot tip transforms into a flower, it is alwayssolitary. The arrangement of flowers on theFigure 5.10Modifications of leaf for :(a) support: tendril  (b) protection:
spines  (c) storage: fleshy leaves(c)FleshyleavesLeaftendril(a)(b)Leaves
modified
into spinesFigure 5.9 Different types ofphyllotaxy :(a) Alternate (b) Opposite(c) Whorled(b)(a)(c)
72BIOLOGYfloral axis is termed as inflorescence. Dependingon whether the apex gets converted into a flower orcontinues to grow, two major types of inflorescencesare defined Œ racemose and cymose. In racemose
type of inflorescences the main axis continues togrow, the flowers are borne laterally in an acropetalsuccession (Figure 5.11).In cymose type of  inflorescence the main axisterminates in a flower, hence is limited in growth.The
flowers are borne in a basipetal order (Figure 5.12).5.5THE FLOWERThe flower is the reproductive unit in theangiosperms. It is meant for sexual reproduction.
A typical flower has four different kinds of whorls
arranged successively on the swollen end of the
stalk or pedicel, called thalamus or receptacle.
These are calyx, corolla, androecium and
gynoecium. Calyx and corolla are accessory organs,
while androecium and gynoecium are reproductive
organs. In some flowers like lily, the calyx andcorolla are not distinct and are termed as perianth.
When a flower has both androecium and
gynoecium, it is bisexual. A flower having eitheronly stamens or only carpels is unisexual.In symmetry, the flower may beactinomorphic (radial symmetry) orzygomorphic (bilateral symmetry). When a flower
can be divided into two equal radial halves in any
radial plane passing through the centre, it is said
to be actinomorphic, e.g., mustard, datura, chilli.When it can be divided into two similar halves only
in one particular vertical plane, it is zygomorphic,e.g., pea, gulmohur, bean, Cassia. A flower isasymmetric (irregular) if it cannot be divided intotwo similar halves by any vertical plane passing
through the centre, as in canna.A flower may be trimerous, tetramerous orpentamerous when the floral appendages are inmultiple of 3, 4 or 5, respectively. Flowers
with bracts-reduced leaf found at the base of thepedicel-are called bracteate and those withoutbracts, ebracteate.Figure 5.12  Cymose inflorescenceFigure 5.11  Racemose inflorescence
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS73Based on the position of calyx, corolla and androecium in respect ofthe ovary on thalamus, the flowers are described as hypogynous,perigynous and epigynous (Figure 5.13). In the hypogynous flower thegynoecium occupies the highest position while the other parts are situatedbelow it. The ovary in such flowers is said to be superior, e.g., mustard,china rose and brinjal. If gynoecium is situated in the centre and otherparts of the flower are located on the rim of the thalamus almost at thesame level, it is called perigynous. The ovary here is said to be halfinferior, e.g., plum, rose, peach. In epigynous flowers, the margin ofthalamus grows upward enclosing the ovary completely and getting fused
with it, the other parts of flower arise above the ovary. Hence, the ovary issaid to be inferior as in flowers of guava and cucumber, and the rayflorets of sunflower.5.5.1Parts of a FlowerEach flower normally has four floral whorls, viz., calyx, corolla,androecium and gynoecium (Figure 5.14).5.5.1.1CalyxThe calyx is the outermost whorl of the flower and the members are calledsepals. Generally, sepals are green, leaf like and protect the flower in thebud stage. The calyx may be gamosepalous (sepals united) orpolysepalous (sepals free).5.5.1.2CorollaCorolla is composed of petals. Petals are usually brightly coloured toattract insects for pollination. Like calyx, corolla may be also unitedFigure 5.13Position of floral parts on thalamus : (a) Hypogynous (b)  and (c)Perigynous  (d) Epigynous(a)(b)(c)(d)
74BIOLOGYgamopetalous (petals united) or polypetalous (petals free). The shapeand colour of corolla vary greatly in plants. Corolla may be tubular, bell-
shaped, funnel-shaped or wheel-shaped.Aestivation: The mode of arrangement of sepals or petals in floral budwith respect to the other members of the same whorl is known asaestivation. The main types of aestivation are valvate, twisted, imbricateand vexillary (Figure 5.15). When sepals or petals in a whorl just touchone another at the margin, without overlapping, as in Calotropis, it issaid to be valvate. If one margin of  the appendage overlaps that of thenext one and so on as in china rose, lady™s finger and cotton, it is calledtwisted.  If the margins of sepals or petals overlap one another but not inany particular direction as in Cassia and gulmohur, the aestivation iscalled imbricate. In pea and bean flowers, there are five petals, the largest(standard) overlaps the two lateral petals (wings) which in turn overlap
the two smallest anterior petals (keel);  this type of aestivation is knownas vexillary or papilionaceous.PedicelCalyxCorollaAndroeciumGynoeciumFigure 5.14  Parts of a flowerFigure 5.15 Types of aestivation in corolla : (a) Valvate (b) Twisted (c) Imbricate (d) Vexillary(a)(b)(c)(d)
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS755.5.1.3AndroeciumAndroecium is composed of stamens. Each stamen whichrepresents the male reproductive organ consists of a stalk or afilament and an anther. Each anther is usually bilobed and eachlobe has two chambers, the pollen-sacs. The pollen grains are
produced in pollen-sacs. A sterile stamen is called staminode.Stamens of flower may be united with other members such aspetals or among themselves. When stamens are attached to the
petals, they are epipetalous as in brinjal, or epiphyllous whenattached to the perianth as in the flowers of lily. The stamens in aflower may either remain free (polyandrous) or may be united in
varying degrees. The stamens may be united into one bunch orone bundle (monoadelphous) as in china rose, or two bundles(diadelphous) as in pea, or into more than two  bundles(polyadelphous) as in citrus. There may be a variation in the lengthof filaments within a flower, as in Salvia and mustard.5.5.1.4GynoeciumGynoecium is the female reproductive part of the flower and is madeup of one or more carpels. A carpel consists of three parts namely
stigma, style and ovary. Ovary is the enlarged basal part, on whichlies the elongated tube, the style. The style connects the ovary to thestigma. The stigma is usually at the tip of the style and is thereceptive surface for pollen grains. Each ovary bears one or moreovules attached to a flattened, cushion-like placenta. When morethan one carpel is present, they may be free (as in lotus and rose)and are called apocarpous. They are termed syncarpous whencarpels are fused, as in mustard and tomato. After fertilisation, the
ovules develop into seeds and the ovary matures into a fruit.Placentation: The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is knownas placentation. The placentation are of different types namely,marginal, axile, parietal, basal, central and free central (Figure 5.16).
In marginal  placentation the placenta forms a ridge along theventral suture of the ovary and the ovules are borne on this ridge
forming two rows, as in pea. When the  placenta is axial and the
ovules are attached to it in a multilocular ovary, the placentaion issaid to be axile, as in china rose, tomato and lemon. In parietalplacentation, the ovules develop on the inner wall of the ovary oron peripheral part. Ovary is one-chambered but it becomes two-chambered due to the formation of the false septum, e.g., mustardand Argemone. When the ovules are borne on central axis andsepta are absent, as in Dianthus and Primrose the placentation isFigure 5.16Types ofplacentation :(a) Marginal(b) Axile(c) Parietal(d) Free central(e) Basal(a)(e)(b)(d)(c)(a)
76BIOLOGYcalled free central. In basal placentation, the placenta develops at thebase of ovary and a single ovule is attached to it, as in sunflower, marigold.5.6THE FRUITThe fruit is a characteristic feature of the flowering plants. It is a matureor ripened ovary, developed after fertilisation. If a fruit is formed without
fertilisation of the ovary, it is called a parthenocarpic fruit.Generally, the fruit consists of a wall or pericarp and seeds. Thepericarp may be dry or fleshy. When pericarp is thick and fleshy, it is
differentiated into the outer epicarp, the middle mesocarp and the innerendocarp.In mango and coconut, the fruit is known as a drupe (Figure 5.17).They develop from monocarpellary superior ovaries and are one seeded.In mango the pericarp is well differentiated into an outer thin epicarp, amiddle fleshy edible mesocarp and an inner stony hard endocarp. In
coconut which is also a drupe, the mesocarp is fibrous.5.7THE SEEDThe ovules after fertilisation, develop into seeds. A seed is made up of a
seed coat and an embryo. The embryo is made up of a radicle, an embryonalaxis and one (as in wheat, maize) or two cotyledons (as in gram and pea).5.7.1Structure of a Dicotyledonous SeedThe outermost covering of a seed is the seed coat. The seed coat has twolayers, the outer testa and the inner tegmen. The hilum is a scar on theseed coat through which the developing seeds were attached to the fruit.
Above the hilum is a small pore called the micropyle. Within the seedFigure 5.17  Parts of a fruit : (a) Mango  (b) Coconut(a)(b)
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS77coat is the embryo, consisting of anembryonal axis and two cotyledons. Thecotyledons are often fleshy and full of reservefood materials. At the two ends of the
embryonal axis are present the radicle and
the plumule (Figure 5.18). In some seeds
such as castor the endosperm formed as a
result of double fertilisation, is a food storingtissue. In plants such as bean, gram andpea, the endosperm is not present in mature
seeds and such seeds are called non-
endospermous.Seed coatHilumMicropyle
CotyledonPlumuleRadicleFigure 5.18 Structure of dicotyledonous seedFigure 5.19 Structure of a monocotyledonous seedSeed coat & fruit-wallAleurone layer
Endosperm
ScutellumColeoptilePlumuleRadicleColeorhiza
Endosperm
Embryo5.7.2Structure of Monocotyledonous SeedGenerally, monocotyledonous seeds are endospermic but some as inorchids are non-endospermic. In the seeds of cereals such as maize theseed coat is membranous and generally fused with the fruit wall. Theendosperm is bulky and stores food. The outer covering of endospermseparates the embryo by a proteinous layer called aleurone layer. Theembryo is   small and situated in a groove at one end of the endosperm. It
consists of one large and shield shaped cotyledon known as scutellumand a short axis with a plumule and a radicle. The plumule and radicleare enclosed in sheaths which are called coleoptile and coleorhizarespectively (Figure 5.19).
78BIOLOGY5.8SEMI-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF A TYPICALFLOWERING PLANTVarious morphological features are used to describe aflowering plant. The description has to be brief, in a simpleand scientific language and presented in a propersequence. The plant is described beginning with its habit,
vegetative characters Œ roots, stem and leaves and thenfloral characters inflorescence and flower parts. Afterdescribing various parts of plant, a floral diagram and a
floral formula are presented. The floral formula isrepresented by some symbols. In the floral formula, Brstands for bracteate K stands for calyx , C for corolla, P forperianth, A for androecium and G for Gynoecium, G forsuperior ovary and G for inferior ovary,  for male,  forfemale,  for bisexual plants,  for actinomorphic and for zygomorphic nature of flower. Fusion is indicated byenclosing the figure within bracket and adhesion by a linedrawn above the symbols of the floral parts. A floraldiagram provides information about the number of partsof a flower, their arrangement and the relation they havewith one another (Figure 5.20). The position of the motheraxis with respect to the flower is represented by a dot on
the top of the floral diagram. Calyx, corolla, androeciumand gynoecium are drawn in successive whorls, calyx beingthe outermost and the gynoecium being in the centre.
Floral formula also shows cohesion and adhesion withinparts of whorls and between whorls. The floral diagramand floral formula in Figure 5.20 represents the mustard
plant (Family: Brassicaceae).5.9DESCRIPTION OF SOME IMPORTANT FAMILIES5.9.1FabaceaeThis family was earlier called Papilionoideae, a subfamilyof family Leguminosae. It is distributed all over the world
(Figure 5.21).Vegetative CharactersTrees, shrubs, herbs; root with root nodulesStem: erect or climberLeaves: alternate, pinnately compound or simple; leaf base,pulvinate; stipulate; venation reticulate.Figure 5.20Floral diagram withfloral formula K2+2 C4 A2+4 G(2)
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS79(b)(c)(a)(d)(e)(f)Figure 5.21Pisum sativum (pea) plant :  (a) Flowering twig (b) Flower (c) Petals (d) Reproductive parts (e) L.S.carpel  (f) Floral diagramFloral charactersInflorescence: racemoseFlower: bisexual, zygomorphicCalyx: sepals five, gamosepalous; valvate/imbricate aestivationCorolla: petals five, polypetalous, papilionaceous, consisting of a posteriorstandard, two lateral wings, two anterior ones forming a keel (enclosingstamens and pistil), vexillary aestivationAndroecium: ten, diadelphous, anther dithecousGynoecium: ovary superior, mono carpellary, unilocular with manyovules, style singleFruit: legume; seed: one to many, non-endospermicFloral Formula: % K(5) C1+2+(2) A(9)+1 G1Economic importanceMany plants belonging to the family are sources of pulses (gram, arhar,sem, moong, soyabean; edible oil (soyabean, groundnut); dye (Indigofera);fibres (sunhemp); fodder (Sesbania, Trifolium), ornamentals (lupin, sweetpea); medicine (muliathi).5.9.2SolanaceaeIt is a large family, commonly called as the ‚potato family™. It is widelydistributed in tropics, subtropics and even temperate zones (Figure 5.22).Vegetative CharactersPlants mostly herbs, shrubs and rarely small treesStem: herbaceous rarely woody, aerial; erect, cylindrical, branched, solid
80BIOLOGYor hollow, hairy or glabrous, underground stem in potato (Solanumtuberosum)Leaves: alternate, simple, rarely pinnately compound, exstipulate;venation reticulateFloral CharactersInflorescence : Solitary, axillary or cymose as in SolanumFlower: bisexual, actinomorphicCalyx: sepals five, united, persistent, valvate aestivationCorolla: petals five, united; valvate aestivationAndroecium: stamens five, epipetalousGynoecium: bicarpellary, syncarpous; ovary superior, bilocular, placentaswollen with many ovules
Fruits: berry or capsuleSeeds: many, endospermousFloral Formula: Economic ImportanceMany plants belonging to this family are source of food (tomato, brinjal,potato), spice (chilli); medicine (belladonna, ashwagandha);  fumigatory(tobacco); ornamentals (petunia).(b)(a)(c)(d)(e)(f)Figure 5.22Solanum nigrum (makoi) plant :  (a) Flowering twig  (b) Flower(c) L.S. of flower  (d) Stamens  (e) Carpel  (f) Floral diagram
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS81(a)(b)(c)Figure 5.23Allium cepa (onion) plant :  (a) Plant  (b) Inflorescence  (c) Flower(d) Floral diagram5.9.3LiliaceaeCommonly called the ‚Lily family™ is a characteristic representative ofmonocotyledonous plants. It is distributed world wide (Figure 5.23).Vegetative characters: Perennial herbs with underground bulbs/corms/rhizomesLeaves mostly basal, alternate, linear, exstipulate with parallel venationFloral charactersInflorescence: solitary / cymose; often umbellate clustersFlower: bisexual; actinomorphicPerianth tepal six (3+3), often united into tube; valvate aestivationAndroecium: stamen six, 3+3, epitepalousGynoecium: tricarpellary, syncarpous, ovary superior, trilocular withmany ovules; axile placentation
Fruit: capsule, rarely berrySeed: endospermousFloral Formula: Br P(3+3) A3+3 G(3)Economic ImportanceMany plants belonging to this family are good ornamentals (tulip,Gloriosa), source of medicine (Aloe), vegetables (Asparagus), andcolchicine (Colchicum autumnale).(d)
82BIOLOGYSUMMARYFlowering plants exhibit enormous variation in shape, size, structure, mode ofnutrition, life span, habit and habitat. They have well developed root and shootsystems. Root system is either tap root or fibrous. Generally, dicotyledonous plants
have tap roots while monocotyledonous plants have fibrous roots. The roots insome plants get modified for storage of food, mechanical support and respiration.The shoot system is differentiated into stem, leaves, flowers and fruits. The
morphological features of stems like the presence of nodes and internodes,multicellular hair and positively phototropic nature help to differentiate the stemsfrom roots. Stems also get modified to perform diverse functions such as storage
of food, vegetative propagation and protection under different conditions. Leaf is alateral outgrowth of stem developed exogeneously at the node. These are green incolour to perform the function of photosynthesis. Leaves exhibit marked variations
in their shape, size, margin, apex and extent of incisions of leaf blade (lamina).Like other parts of plants, the leaves also get modified into other structures suchas tendrils, spines for climbing and protection respectively.The flower is a modified shoot, meant for sexual reproduction. The flowers arearranged in different types of inflorescences. They exhibit enormous variation in
structure, symmetry, position of ovary in relation to other parts, arrangement of
petals, sepals, ovules etc. After fertilisation, the ovary is converted into fruits andovules into seeds. Seeds either may be monocotyledonous or dicotyledonous. Theyvary in shape, size and period of viability. The floral characteristics form the basis
of classification and identification of flowering plants. This can be illustratedthrough semi-technical descriptions of families. Hence, a flowering plant isdescribed in a definite sequence by using scientific terms. The floral features are
represented in the summarised form as floral diagrams and floral formula.EXERCISES1.What is meant by modification of root? What type of modification of root is found
in the:(a) Banyan tree  (b) Turnip  (c) Mangrove trees2.Justify the following statements on the basis of external features:(i)  Underground parts of a plant are not always roots.(ii) Flower is a modified shoot.3.How is a pinnately compound leaf different from a palmately compound leaf?4.Explain with suitable examples the different types of phyllotaxy.
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS835.Define the following terms:(a)aestivation(b)placentation(c)actinomorphic(d)zygomorphic(e)superior ovary(f)perigynous flower(g)epipetalous stamen6.Differentiate between
(a)Racemose and cymose inflorescence(b)Fibrous root and adventitious root(c)Apocarpous and syncarpous ovary7.Draw the labelled diagram of the following:(i)gram seed  (ii)  V.S. of maize seed8.Describe modifications of stem with suitable examples.9.Take one flower each of the families Fabaceae and Solanaceae and write itssemi-technical  description. Also draw their floral diagram after studying them.10.Describe the various types of placentations found in flowering plants.11.What is a flower? Describe the parts of a typical angiosperm flower.12.How do the various leaf modifications help plants?13.Define the term inflorescence. Explain the basis for the different typesinflorescence in flowering plants.14.Write the floral formula of a actinomorphic, bisexual, hypogynous flower withfive united sepals, five free petals, five free stamens and two united carples
with superior ovary and axile placentation.15.Describe the arrangement of floral members in relation to their insertion onthalamus.
