
First EditionFebruary 2006  Phalguna 1927
ReprintedOctober 2006 Kartika 1928November 2007 Kartika 1929
January 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Pausa 1932January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Pausha 1934
December 2013 Agrahayana 1935PD 250T RPS© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006````` 165.00ISBN  81-7450-496-6ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher™s consent, in any formof binding or cover other than that in which it is published.The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revisedprice indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrectand should be unacceptable.Publication TeamHead, Publication:
Ashok SrivastavaDivisionChief Production:
Kalyan BanerjeeOfficer
Chief Business:
Gautam GangulyManagerChief Editor:
Naresh Yadav
(Contractual Service)Asstt. Production:
Rajender ChauhanOfficerCover and LayoutShweta RaoIllustrationsLalit MauryaOFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT CampusSri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.Navjivan

Ahmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454
CWC ComplexMaligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869per with NCERT
lication Divisionional Council ofh and Training,New Delhi 110 016akun Printers, 241,Area, Delhi 110 092Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermarkPublished at the Publication Divisionby the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at Laxmi Print India, 556, G.T.
Road, Shahdara, Delhi 110 032
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children™s life atschool must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction

of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teacherswill take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and

freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children™s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,

Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor K. Muralidhar,

Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook. We are grateful to
their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and

organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National

Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and

contribution.As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvementin the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which

will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.DirectorNew Delhi National Council of Educational

20 December 2005Research and Training(iv)
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICSJ.V. Narlikar, 
Emeritus Professor
, Chairman, Advisory Committee, Inter University Centre for Astronomy
and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune University, PuneCHIEF ADVISORK. Muralidhar, 
Professor
, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, DelhiMEMBERSAjit Kumar Kavathekar, 
Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
B.B.P. Gupta, 
Professor
, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong
C.V. Shimray, 
Lecturer
, Department of 
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Dinesh Kumar, 
Reader, Department of 
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
J.S. Gill, Professor
, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
K. Sarath Chandran, Reader (Zoology), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Nalini Nigam, Reader (Botany), Ramjas College, University of Delhi, DelhiPratima Gaur, 
Professor
, Department of Zoology, University of Allahabad, AllahabadRatnam Kaul Wattal, 
Reader (Botany), Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, DelhiR.K. Seth, UGC Scientist  C, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, DelhiR.P. Singh, 
Lecturer 
(Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Sangeeta Sharma, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, New DelhiSavithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi; Former Fellow, Centrefor Science Education and Communication, University of Delhi, DelhiS.C. Jain, Professor
, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Sunaina Sharma, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Dwarka, New DelhiTejinder Chawla, 
PGT (Biology), Guru Harkrishan Public School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
T.N. Lakhanpal, Professor (Retd.), Department of Bio Sciences, Himachal Pradesh University, ShimlaU.K. Nanda, Professor
, Regional Institute of Education, BhubaneshwarMEMBER-COORDINATORB.K. Tripathi, 
Reader, Department of 
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT.
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSNational Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully
acknowledges the contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in thedevelopment of the Biology textbook for Class XI. The Council is grateful to ArvindGupte, Principal (Retd.), Government Collegiate Education Services, Madhya Pradesh;Shailaja Hittalmani, Associate Professor (Genetics), University of Agricultural Sciences,Bangalore; K.R. Shivanna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Botany, University of Delhi,Delhi; R.S. Bedwal, Professor
, Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur;P.S. Srivastava, 
Professor, 
Department of Biotechnology, Hamdard University, New Delhi
and Pramila Shivanna, former Teacher
, D.A.V. School, Delhi, for their valuable
suggestions. The Council is also thankful to V.K. Bhasin, 
Professor and Head
,Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi;  P.P. Bakre, 
Professor and Head
,Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur and Savithri Singh, Principal,Acharya Narendra Dev College, New Delhi for their support. The Council is also gratefulto B.K. Gupta, Scientist, Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi for providing pictures ofzoological parks and Sameer Singh for the pictures on the front and back cover. All
the other photographs used in the book provided by Savithri Singh and taken ateither at NCERT, IARI Campus or Acharya Narendra Dev College is gratefully

acknowledged.NCERT sincerely acknowledges the contributions of the members who participated
in the review of the manuscripts Œ M.K. Tiwari, 
PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya,
Mandsaur, Madhya Pradesh; Maria Gracias Fernandes, 
PGT (Biology), G.V.M.S. Higher
Secondary, Ponda, Goa; A.K. Ganguly, PGT (Biology), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya,Roshnabad, Haridwar; Shivani Goswami, PGT (Biology), The Mother™s InternationalSchool, New Delhi and B.N. Pandey, Principal, Ordinance Factory Sr. Sec. School,
Dehradun.The Council is highly thankful to M. Chandra, Professor and Head, DESM; HukumSingh, Professor
, DESM, NCERT for their valuable support throughout the making of
this book.The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Deepak Kapoor,
Incharge, Computer Station; Mohd. Khalid Raza and Arvind Sharma, DTP operators;Saswati Banerjee, Copy Editor; Archana Srivastava, Proof Reader and APC office andadministrative staff of DESM, NCERT.
The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT in bringing out this publication
are also appreciated.
A NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTSBiology is the science of life. It is the story of life on earth. It is the science of life forms andliving processes. Biological systems, often appear to challenge physical laws that govern thebehaviour of matter and energy in our world. Historically, biological knowledge was ancillaryto knowledge of human body and its function. The latter as we know, is the basis of medical
practice. However, parts of biological knowledge developed independent of human application.
Fundamental questions about origin of life, the origin and growth of biodiversity, the evolutionof flora and fauna of different habitats, etc., caught the imagination of biologists.The very description of living organisms, be it from morphological perspective, physiologicalperspective, taxonomical perspective, etc., engaged scientists to such an extent that for sheerconvenience, if not for anything else, the subject matter got artificially divided into the sub-
disciplines of botany and zoology and later into even microbiology. Meanwhile, physical sciencesmade heavy inroads into biology, and established biochemistry and biophysics as new sub-disciplines of biology. Mendel™s work and its rediscovery in the early twentieth century led to
the promotion of study of genetics. The discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA andthe deciphering of three dimensional structures of many macromolecules led to theestablishment of and phenomenal growth in the dominating area of molecular biology. In asense, functional disciplines laying emphasis on mechanisms underlying living processes,received more attention, support, intellectual and social recognition. Biology,  unfortunately,
got divided into classical and modern biology. To the majority of practising biologists, pursuitof biological research became more empirical rather than a curiosity and hypothesis drivenintellectual exercise as is the case with theoretical physics, experimental physics, structural
chemistry and material science. Fortunately and quietly, general unifying principles of biologywere also being discovered, rediscovered and emphasised. The work of Mayr, Dobhzhansky,
Haldane, Perutz, Khorana, Morgan, Darlington, Fisher and many others brought respect and
seriousness to both classical and molecular biological disciplines. Ecology and Systems biologygot established as unifying biological disciplines. Every area of biology began developinginterface with not only other areas of biology but also other disciplines of science and
mathematics. Pretty soon, the boundaries became porous. They are now on the verge ofdisappearing altogether. Progress in human biology, biomedical sciences, especially the
structure, functioning and evolution of human brain brought in respect, awe and philosophical
insights to biology. Biology even stepped out of laboratories, museums and natural parks andraised social, economic and cultural issues capturing the imagination of general public andhence political attention. Educationists did not lag behind and realised that biology should be
taught as an interdisciplinary and integrating science at all stages of educational trainingespecially at school and undergraduate levels. A new synthesis of all areas of basic andapplied areas of biology is the need of the hour. Biology has come of age. It has an independent

set of concepts which are universal just like physics and chemistry and mathematics.The present volume is the first time presentation of the integrated biology for the schoollevel children.  One of the lacunae in biology teaching and study is the absence of integration
with other disciplinary knowledge of physics, chemistry etc. Further many processes in plants,animals and microbes are similar when looked from physico-chemical perspective. Cell biologyhas brought out the unifying common cellular level activities underlying apparently diversephenomena across plants, animals and microbes. Similarly, molecular science (e.g.
biochemistry or molecular biology) has revealed the similar molecular mechanisms in allthese apparently diverse organisms like plants, animals and microbes. Phenomena likerespiration, metabolism, energy utlisation, growth, reproduction and development can bediscussed in a unifying manner rather than as separate unrelated processes in plants andanimals. An attempt has been made to unify such diverse disciplines in the book. Theintegration achieved however, is partial and not complete. Hopefully along with changes in

the teaching and learning context, to be brought out in the next few years, the next edition ofthis book will reveal more integration of botany, zoology and microbiology and truly reflect thetrue nature of biology Œ the future science of man by man and for man.This new textbook of Biology for class XI is a completely rewritten book in view of thesyllabus revision and restructuring. It is also in accordance with the spirit of the National
Curriculum Framework (2005) guidelines. The subject matter is presented under twenty-two
chapters which are grouped under five thematic units. Each unit has a brief write up precedingthe unit highlighting the essence of the chapters to follow under that unit. Each unit also hasa biographical sketch of a prominent scientist in that area. Each chapter has, on the firstpage, a detailed table of contents giving sub-headings within the chapter. Decimal system
using arabic numerals has been employed to indicate these sub-headings. At the end of each
chapter a brief summary is provided. This brings to the notice of the student, what she/he issupposed to have learnt by studying the chapter. A set of questions is also provided at the
conclusion of each chapter. These questions are essentially to enable the student to test

herself/himself as to how much she/he has understood the subject matter. There are questions
which are purely of information recall type; there are questions which need analytical thinkingto answer and hence test true understanding; there are questions which are problems to
solve and finally there are questions which need analysis and speculation as there is no oneto answer to such questions. This tests the critical understanding of the subject matter in themind of the student.Special emphasis has been given on the narrative style, illustrations, activity exercises,clarity of expression, coverage of topics within the available time in school. A large number of
extremely talented and dedicated people including practising teachers helped in bringing out
this beautiful book. Our main purpose was to make sure that school level biology is not aburden for students and teachers. We sincerely wish that teaching biology and learning biology
would become an enjoyable activity.Professor K. MuralidharDepartment of ZoologyUniversity of Delhi
CONTENTSFOREWORDiiiA NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTSviiUNIT IDIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD1-62Chapter 1:The Living World3
Chapter 2:Biological Cl
assification16
Chapter 3:Plant
 Kingdom29
Chapter 4:Ani
mal Kingdom46
UNIT IISTRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS63-122Chapter 5:Morphology of Flowering Plants65

Chapter 6:Anatomy of Flowering Plants84

Chapter 7:
Structural Organisation in Animals100
UNIT IIICELL : STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS123-172Chapter 8: Cell : The Unit of Life125

Chapter 9: Bi
omolecules142
Chapter 10: Cell Cycle and Cell Division162

UNIT IVPLANT PHYSIOLOGY173-254Chapter 11:T
ransport in Plants175
Chapter 12:
Mineral Nutrition194
Chapter 13:Phot
osynthesis in Higher Plants206
Chapter 14:
Respiration in Plants226
Chapter 15:Plant 
Growth and Development239
UNIT VHUMAN PHYSIOLOGY255-342Chapter 16:Digestion 
and Absorption257
Chapter 17:Breathing and Exchange of Gases268
Chapter 18:Body Fluids and Circulation278
Chapter 19:
Excretory Products and their Elimination290
Chapter 20:Locomotion and Movement302
Chapter 21:Neural Control and Coordination315
Chapter 22:
Chemical Coordination and Integration330
SUPPLEMENTARY
 MATERIAL
343-346
First EditionFebruary 2006  Phalguna 1927
ReprintedOctober 2006 Kartika 1928November 2007 Kartika 1929
January 2009 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Pausa 1932January 2012 Magha 1933
December 2012 Pausha 1934PD 250T RPS© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006````` 165.00Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermarkPublished at the Publication Divisionby the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at Sam Industrial Enterprises
(P) Ltd., A-17 and 18, Sector 60, Noida
(UP) - 201 301ISBN  81-7450-496-6ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher™s consent, in any formof binding or cover other than that in which it is published.The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revisedprice indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrectand should be unacceptable.Publication TeamHead, Publication:
Ashok SrivastavaDivisionChief Production:
Shiv KumarOfficer
Chief Editor:
Naresh Yadav
(Incharge)Chief Business:
Gautam GangulyManagerAsstt. Production:
Rajender ChauhanOfficerCover and LayoutShweta RaoIllustrationsLalit MauryaOFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT CampusSri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.Navjivan

Ahmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454
CWC ComplexMaligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869
