16BIOLOGYSince the dawn of civilisation, there have been many attempts to classifyliving organisms. It was done instinctively not using criteria that werescientific but borne out of a need to use organisms for our own use Œ forfood, shelter and clothing.  Aristotle was the earliest to attempt a more
scientific basis for classification. He used simple morphological charactersto classify plants into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animalsinto two groups, those which had red blood and those that did not.In Linnaeus' time a Two Kingdom system of classification withPlantae  and Animalia kingdoms was developed that included all  plantsand animals respectively. This system was used till very recently. This
system did not distinguish between the eukaryotes and prokaryotes,unicellular and multicellular organisms and photosynthetic (green algae)and non-photosynthetic (fungi) organisms. Classification of organisms
into plants and animals was easily done and was easy to understand,but, a large number of organisms did not fall into either category. Hencethe two kingdom classification used for a long time was found inadequate.
A need was also felt for including, besides gross morphology, othercharacteristics like cell structure, nature of wall, mode of nutrition, habitat,methods of reproduction, evolutionary relationships, etc.  Classification
systems for the living organisms have hence, undergone several changesover time.  Though plant and animal kingdoms have been a constantunder all different systems, the understanding of what groups/organisms
be included under these kingdoms have been changing; the number andnature of other kingdoms have also been understood differently bydifferent scientists over time.BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATIONCHAPTER  22.1Kingdom Monera2.2Kingdom Protista2.3Kingdom Fungi2.4Kingdom Plantae2.5KingdomAnimalia2.6Viruses, Viroidsand Lichens
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION17R.H. Whittaker (1969) proposed a Five Kingdom Classification.The kingdoms defined by him were named Monera, Protista, Fungi,Plantae and Animalia. The main criteria for classification used by himinclude cell structure, thallus organisation, mode of nutrition,reproduction and phylogenetic relationships. Table 2.1 gives acomparative account of different characteristics of the five kingdoms.Let us look at this five kingdom classification to understand the issuesand considerations that influenced the classification system. Earlier
classification systems included bacteria, blue green algae, fungi, mosses,ferns, gymnosperms and the angiosperms under ‚Plants™. The character
that unified this whole kingdom was that all the organisms included hada cell wall in their cells.  This placed together groups which widely differedin other characteristics. It brought together the prokaryotic bacteria and
the blue green algae with other groups which were eukaryotic. It alsogrouped together the unicellular organisms and the multicellular ones,say, for example, Chlamydomonas and Spirogyra were placed togetherunder algae. The classification did not differentiate between theheterotrophic group Œ fungi, and the autotrophic green plants, thoughthey also showed a characteristic difference in their walls composition Œ
the fungi had chitin in their walls while the green plants had a cellulosicFive KingdomsCharactersCell typeCell wallNuclearmembrane
Body
organisationMode ofnutritionMoneraProkaryoticNoncellulosic(Polysaccharide
+ amino acid)AbsentCellularAutotrophic(chemosyn-
thetic and
photosynthetic)
and Hetero-
trophic (sapro-
phytic/para-
sitic)ProtistaEukaryoticPresent insomePresentCellularAutotrophic(Photosyn-
thetic) and
Hetero-
trophicFungiEukaryoticPresent(without
cellulose)PresentMulticeullar/loose tissueHeterotrophic(Saprophytic/
Parasitic)PlantaeEukaryoticPresent(cellulose)PresentTissue/organAutotrophic(Photosyn-
thetic)AnimaliaEukaryoticAbsentPresentTissue/organ/organ systemHeterotrophic(Holozoic/Saprophytic
etc.)TABLE 2.1  Characteristics of the Five Kingdoms
18BIOLOGYcell wall.  When such characteristics were considered, the fungi were placedin a separate kingdom Œ Kingdom Fungi. All prokaryotic organisms weregrouped together under Kingdom Monera and the unicellular eukaryoticorganisms were placed in Kingdom Protista. Kingdom Protista has
brought together Chlamydomonas, Chlorella (earlier placed in Algaewithin Plants and both having cell walls) with Paramoecium and Amoeba(which were earlier placed in the animal kingdom which lack cell wall). It
has put together organisms which, in earlier classifications, were placedin different kingdoms.  This happened because the criteria for classificationchanged. This kind of changes will take place in future too depending on
the improvement in our understanding of characteristics and evolutionaryrelationships. Over time, an attempt has been made to evolve aclassification system which reflects not only the morphological,
physiological and reproductive similarities, but is also phylogenetic, i.e.,is based on  evolutionary relationships.In this chapter we will study characteristics of Kingdoms Monera,Protista and Fungi of the Whittaker system of classification.  The Kingdoms
Plantae and Animalia, commonly referred to as plant and animalkingdoms, respectively, will be dealt with separately in chapters 3 and 4.2.1KINGDOM MONERASpore
FlagellumCocciBacilliSpirillaVibrio
Figure 2.1 Bacteria of different shapesBacteria are the sole members of the Kingdom Monera. They are the most
abundant micro-organisms. Bacteria occur almost everywhere. Hundredsof bacteria are present in a handful of soil. They also live in extreme habitatssuch as hot springs, deserts, snow and deep oceans where very few other
life forms can survive. Many of them live in or on other organisms asparasites.Bacteria are grouped under four categories based on their shape: thespherical Coccus (pl.: cocci), the rod-shaped Bacillus (pl.: bacilli), the
comma-shaped Vibrium (pl.: vibrio) and the spiral Spirillum (pl.: spirilla)(Figure 2.1).
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION19Though the bacterial structure is very simple, they are very complexin behaviour. Compared to many other organisms, bacteria as a groupshow the most extensive metabolic diversity. Some of the bacteria areautotrophic, i.e., they synthesise their own food from inorganic substrates.
They may be photosynthetic autotrophic or chemosynthetic autotrophic.The vast majority of bacteria are heterotrophs, i.e., they do not synthesisetheir own food but depend on other organisms or on dead organic matter
for food.2.1.1ArchaebacteriaThese bacteria are special since they live in some of the most harsh habitatssuch as extreme salty areas (halophiles), hot springs (thermoacidophiles)and marshy areas (methanogens). Archaebacteria differ from other bacteriain having a different cell wall structure and this feature is responsible for
their survival in extreme conditions. Methanogens are present in the gutof several ruminant animals such as cows and buffaloes and they areresponsible for the production of methane (biogas) from the dung of these
animals.Figure 2.2A filamentous blue-greenalgae Œ Nostoc2.1.2EubacteriaThere are thousands of different eubacteria or ‚truebacteria™. They are characterised by the presence of arigid cell wall, and if motile, a flagellum. The
cyanobacteria (also referred to as blue-green algae)have chlorophyll a similar to green plants and arephotosynthetic autotrophs (Figure 2.2). Thecyanobacteria are unicellular, colonial or filamentous,freshwater/marine or terrestrial algae. The coloniesare generally surrounded by gelatinous sheath. They
often form blooms in polluted water bodies. Some ofthese organisms can fix atmospheric nitrogen inspecialised cells called heterocysts, e.g., Nostoc andAnabaena. Chemosynthetic autotrophic bacteriaoxidise various inorganic substances such as
nitrates, nitrites and ammonia and use the released
energy for their ATP production. They play a great rolein recycling nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorous,iron and sulphur.Heterotrophic bacteria are the most abundantin nature. The majority are important decomposers.
Many of them have a significant impact on humanaffairs. They are helpful in making curd from milk,production  of antibiotics, fixing nitrogen in legume
20BIOLOGYroots, etc. Some are pathogens causing damageto human beings, crops, farm animals and pets.
Cholera, typhoid, tetanus, citrus canker are well
known diseases  caused by different bacteria.Bacteria reproduce mainly by fission (Figure2.3). Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions,
they produce spores. They also reproduce by a
sort of sexual reproduction by adopting a
primitive type of DNA transfer from one bacterium
to the other.The Mycoplasma are organisms thatcompletely lack a cell wall. They are the smallestliving cells known and can survive without oxygen. Many mycoplasma
are pathogenic in animals and plants.2.2KINGDOM PROTISTAAll single-celled eukaryotes are placed under Protista, but the boundariesof this kingdom are not well defined. What may be ‚a photosyntheticprotistan™ to one biologist may be ‚a plant™ to another. In this book we
include Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime moulds and
Protozoans under Protista. Members of Protista are primarily aquatic.
This kingdom forms a link with the others dealing with plants, animals
and fungi. Being eukaryotes, the protistan cell body contains a well defined
nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles. Some have flagella or
cilia. Protists reproduce asexually and sexually by a process involving
cell fusion and zygote formation.2.2.1ChrysophytesThis group includes diatoms and golden algae (desmids). They are foundin fresh water as well as in marine environments. They are microscopic
and float passively in water currents (plankton). Most of them are
photosynthetic. In diatoms the cell walls form two thin overlapping shells,
which fit together as in a soap box. The walls are embedded with silica
and thus the walls are indestructible. Thus, diatoms have left behind
large amount of cell wall deposits in their habitat; this accumulation over
billions of years is referred to as ‚diatomaceous earth™. Being gritty this
soil is used in polishing, filtration of oils and syrups. Diatoms are the
chief ‚producers™ in the oceans.Figure 2.3 A dividing bacterium
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION212.2.2DinoflagellatesThese organisms are mostly marine and photosynthetic.They appear yellow, green, brown, blue or red dependingon the main pigments present in their cells. The cell wall
has stiff cellulose plates on the outer surface. Most ofthem have two flagella; one lies longitudinally and theother transversely in a furrow between the wall plates.
Very often, red dinoflagellates (Example: Gonyaulax)undergo such rapid multiplication that they make the
sea appear red (red tides). Toxins released by such large
numbers may even kill other marine animals such asfishes.2.2.3EuglenoidsMajority of them are fresh water organisms found instagnant water. Instead of a cell wall, they have a proteinrich layer called pellicle which makes their body flexible.They have two flagella, a short and a long one. Thoughthey are photosynthetic in the presence of sunlight, whendeprived of sunlight they behave like heterotrophs bypredating on other smaller organisms. Interestingly, thepigments of euglenoids are identical to those present inhigher plants. Example: Euglena (Figure 2.4a).2.2.4Slime MouldsSlime moulds are saprophytic protists. The body movesalong decaying twigs and leaves engulfing organicmaterial. Under suitable conditions, they form an
aggregation called plasmodium which may grow andspread over several feet. During unfavourable conditions,the plasmodium differentiates and forms fruiting bodies
bearing spores at their tips. The spores possess true walls.They are extremely resistant and survive for many years,even under adverse conditions. The spores are dispersed
by air currents.2.2.5ProtozoansAll protozoans are heterotrophs and live as predators orparasites. They are believed to be primitive relatives ofanimals. There are four major groups of protozoans.Amoeboid protozoans: These organisms live in freshwater, sea water or moist soil. They move and captureFigure 2.4(a) Euglena(b) Paramoecium(b)(a)
22BIOLOGYtheir prey by putting out pseudopodia (false feet) as in Amoeba. Marineforms have silica shells on their surface. Some of them such as Entamoebaare parasites.Flagellated protozoans: The members of this group are either free-livingor parasitic. They have flagella. The parasitic forms cause diaseases suchas sleeping sickness. Example: Trypanosoma.Ciliated protozoans: These are aquatic, actively moving organisms becauseof the presence of thousands of cilia. They have a cavity (gullet) that opens
to the outside of the cell surface. The coordinated movement of rows ofcilia causes the water laden with food to be steered into the gullet. Example:Paramoecium (Figure 2.4b).Sporozoans: This includes diverse organisms that have an infectiousspore-like stage in their life cycle. The most notorious is Plasmodium(malarial parasite) which causes malaria, a disease which has a staggeringeffect on human population.2.3KINGDOM FUNGIThe fungi constitute a unique kingdom of heterotrophic organisms. Theyshow a great diversity in morphology and habitat. When your breaddevelops a mould or your orange rots it is because of fungi. The commonmushroom you eat and toadstools are also fungi. White spots seen onmustard leaves are due to a parasitic fungus. Some unicellular fungi,e.g., yeast are used to make bread and beer. Other fungi cause diseasesin plants and animals; wheat rust-causing Puccinia is an importantexample. Some are the source of antibiotics, e.g., Penicillium. Fungi arecosmopolitan and occur in air, water, soil and on animals and plants.They prefer to grow in warm and humid places. Have you ever wonderedwhy we keep food in the refrigerator ? Yes, it is to prevent food from goingbad due to bacterial or fungal infections.With the exception of yeasts which are unicellular, fungi arefilamentous. Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structurescalled hyphae. The network of hyphae is known as mycelium. Some hyphaeare continuous tubes filled with multinucleated cytoplasm Œ these arecalled coenocytic hyphae. Others have septae or cross walls in theirhyphae. The cell walls of fungi are composed of chitin and polysaccharides.Most fungi are heterotrophic and absorb soluble organic matter fromdead substrates and hence are  called saprophytes. Those that dependon living plants and animals are called parasites. They can also live assymbionts Œ in association with algae as lichens and with roots of higherplants as mycorrhiza.Reproduction in fungi can take place by vegetative means Œfragmentation, fission and budding. Asexual reproduction is by spores
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION23called conidia or sporangiospores or zoospores, and sexual reproductionis by oospores, ascospores and basidiospores. The various spores areproduced in distinct structures called fruiting bodies. The sexual cycleinvolves the following  three steps:(i)Fusion of protoplasms between two motile or non-motile gametescalled plasmogamy.(ii)Fusion of two nuclei called karyogamy.(iii)Meiosis in zygote resulting in haploid spores.When a fungus reproduces sexually, two haploidhyphae of compatible mating types come together and
fuse. In some fungi the fusion of two haploid cells
immediately results in diploid cells (2n). However, in otherfungi (ascomycetes and basidiomycetes), an interveningdikaryotic stage (n + n, i.e., two nuclei per cell) occurs;
such a condition is called a dikaryon and the phase iscalled dikaryophase of fungus. Later, the parental nucleifuse and the cells become diploid.  The fungi form fruiting
bodies in which reduction division occurs, leading toformation of haploid spores.The morphology of the mycelium, mode of sporeformation and fruiting bodies  form the basis for the
division of the kingdom  into various classes.2.3.1PhycomycetesMembers of phycomycetes are found in aquatic habitatsand on decaying wood in moist and damp places or asobligate parasites on plants. The mycelium is aseptateand coenocytic. Asexual reproduction takes place byzoospores (motile) or by aplanospores (non-motile). Thesespores are endogenously produced in sporangium. Azygospore is formed by fusion of two gametes. Thesegametes are similar in morphology (isogamous) ordissimilar (anisogamous or oogamous). Some commonexamples are Mucor (Figure 2.5a), Rhizopus (the breadmould mentioned earlier) and Albugo (the parasitic fungion mustard).2.3.2AscomycetesCommonly known as sac-fungi, the as comycetes  are mostlymulticellular, e.g., Penicillium, or rarely unicellular, e.g., yeast(Saccharomyces). They are saprophytic, decomposers,parasitic or coprophilous (growing on dung). MyceliumFigure 2.5Fungi: (a) Mucor(b) Aspergillus (c) Agaricus(c)(a)(b)
24BIOLOGYis branched and septate. The asexual spores are conidia producedexogenously on the special mycelium called conidiophores. Conidia ongermination produce mycelium. Sexual spores are called ascospores
which are produced endogenously in sac like asci (singular ascus). These
asci are arranged in different types of fruiting bodies called ascocarps.
Some examples are Aspergillus (Figure 2.5b), Claviceps and Neurospora.Neurospora  is used extensively in biochemical and genetic work. Manymembers like morels and truffles are edible and are considered  delicacies.2.3.3BasidiomycetesCommonly known forms of basidiomycetes are mushrooms, bracket fungior puffballs. They grow in soil, on logs and tree stumps and in living
plant bodies as parasites, e.g., rusts and smuts. The mycelium is branched
and septate. The asexual spores are generally not found, but vegetative
reproduction by fragmentation is common. The sex organs are absent,
but plasmogamy is brought about by fusion of two vegetative or somatic
cells of different strains or genotypes. The resultant structure is dikaryotic
which ultimately gives rise to basidium. Karyogamy and meiosis take
place in the basidium producing four basidiospores. The basidiospores
are exogenously produced on the basidium (pl.: basidia). The basidia are
arranged in fruiting bodies called basidiocarps. Some common members
are Agaricus (mushroom) (Figure 2.5c), Ustilago (smut) and Puccinia (rustfungus).2.3.4DeuteromycetesCommonly known as imperfect fungi because only the asexual orvegetative phases of these fungi are known.  When the sexual forms of
these fungi were discovered they were moved into classes they rightly
belong to.  It is also possible that the asexual and vegetative stage have
been given one name (and placed under deuteromycetes) and the sexual
stage another (and placed under another class).  Later when the linkages
were established, the fungi were correctly identified and moved out of
deuteromycetes. Once perfect (sexual) stages of members of
dueteromycetes were discovered they were often moved to ascomycetes
and basidiomycetes. The deuteromycetes reproduce only by asexual spores
known as conidia. The mycelium is septate and branched. Some members
are saprophytes or parasites while a large number of them are
decomposers of litter and help in mineral cycling. Some examples are
Alternaria, Colletotrichum and Trichoderma.
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION252.4KINGDOM PLANTAEKingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containingorganisms commonly called plants. A few members are partiallyheterotrophic such as the insectivorous plants or parasites. Bladderwort
and Venus fly trap are examples of insectivorous plants and Cuscuta is aparasite. The plant cells have an eukaryotic structure with prominent
chloroplasts and cell wall mainly made of cellulose. You will study the
eukaryotic cell structure in detail in Chapter 8. Plantae includes algae,bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms.Life cycle of plants has two distinct phases Œ the diploid sporophyticand the haploid gametophytic Œ that alternate with each other. The lengths
of the haploid and diploid phases, and whether these phases are freeŒliving or dependent on others, vary among different groups in plants.
This phenomenon is called alternation of generation. You will studyfurther details of this kingdom in Chapter3.2.5KINGDOM ANIMALIAThis kingdom is characterised by heterotrophic eukaryotic organismsthat are multicellular and their cells lack cell walls. They directly orindirectly depend on plants for food. They digest their food in an internal
cavity and store food reserves as glycogen or fat. Their mode of nutritionis holozoic Œ by ingestion of food. They follow a definite growth patternand grow into adults that have a definite shape and size. Higher forms
show elaborate sensory and neuromotor mechanism. Most of them arecapable of locomotion.The sexual reproduction is by copulation of male and female followedby embryological development. Salient features of various phyla are
described in Chapter 4.2.6VIRUSES, VIROIDS AND LICHENSIn the five kingdom classification of Whittaker there is no mention of someacellular organisms like viruses and viroids, and lichens. These are brieflyintroduced here.All of us who have suffered the ill effects of common cold or ‚flu™ knowwhat effects viruses can have on us, even if we do not associate it with our
condition. Viruses did not find a place in classification since they are not
truly ‚living™, if we understand living as those organisms that have a cellstructure.  The viruses are non-cellular organisms that are characterisedby having an inert crystalline structure outside the living cell. Once they
26BIOLOGYinfect a cell they take over the machinery of the host cell to replicatethemselves, killing the host. Would you call viruses living or non-living?The name virus that means venom or poisonous fluid was given byPasteur. D.J. Ivanowsky (1892) recognised certain microbes as causal
organism of the mosaic disease of tobacco (Figure 2.6a). These were found
to be smaller than bacteria because they passed through bacteria-proof
filters. M.W. Beijerinek (1898) demonstrated that the extract of the infected
plants of  tobacco could cause infection in healthy plants and called thefluid as Contagium vivum fluidum (infectious living fluid).  W.M. Stanley(1935) showed that viruses could be crystallised and crystals consistlargely of proteins. They are inert outside their specific host cell. Viruses
are obligate parasites.In addition to proteins, viruses also contain genetic material, that couldbe either RNA or DNA.  No virus contains both RNA and DNA.  A virus isa nucleoprotein and the genetic material is infectious. In general, virusesthat infect plants have single stranded RNA and viruses that infect animals
have either single or double stranded RNA or double stranded DNA.
Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages (viruses that infect the bacteria) are
usually double stranded DNA viruses (Figure 2.6b). The protein coat
called capsid made of small subunits called capsomeres, protects thenucleic acid. These capsomeres are arranged in helical or polyhedralgeometric forms. Viruses cause diseases like  mumps, small pox, herpes
and influenza. AIDS in humans is also caused by a virus. In plants, the
symptoms can be mosaic formation, leaf rolling and curling, yellowing
and vein clearing, dwarfing  and stunted growth.RNACapsid(a)SheathHeadTail fibres
Collar(b)Figure 2.6  (a) Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV)  (b) Bacteriophage
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION27SUMMARYBiological classification of plants and animals was first proposed by Aristotle onthe basis of simple morphological characters. Linnaeus later classified all livingorganisms into two kingdoms Œ Plantae and Animalia. Whittaker proposed an
elaborate five kingdom classification Œ Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae andAnimalia. The main criteria of the five kingdom classification were cell structure,body organisation, mode of nutrition and reproduction, and phylogenetic
relationships.In the five kingdom classification, bacteria are included in Kingdom Monera.Bacteria are cosmopolitan in distribution. These organisms show the most extensive
metabolic diversity. Bacteria may be autotrophic or heterotrophic in their mode ofnutrition. Kingdom Protista includes all single-celled eukaryotes such asChrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime-moulds and Protozoans. Protists
have defined nucleus and other membrane bound organelles. They reproduceboth asexually and sexually. Members of Kingdom Fungi show a great diversityin structures and habitat. Most fungi are saprophytic in their mode of nutrition.
They show asexual and sexual reproduction. Phycomycetes, Ascomycetes,Basidiomycetes and Deuteromycetes are the four classes under this kingdom.The plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing organisms. Algae,
bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms are included in thisgroup. The life cycle of plants exhibit alternation of generations Œ gametophyticand sporophytic generations. The heterotrophic eukaryotic, multicellular
organisms lacking a cell wall are included in the Kingdom Animalia. The mode ofnutrition of these organisms is holozoic. They reproduce mostly by the sexualmode. Some acellular organisms like viruses and viroids as well as the lichens are
not included in the five kingdom system of classification.Viroids : In 1971, T.O. Diener discovered a new infectious agent thatwas smaller than viruses and caused potato spindle tuber disease. It wasfound to be a free RNA; it lacked the protein coat that is found in viruses,hence the name viroid. The RNA of the viroid was of low molecular weight.Lichens : Lichens are symbiotic associations i.e. mutually usefulassociations, between algae and fungi. The algal component is known asphycobiont and fungal component as mycobiont, which are autotrophicand heterotrophic, respectively. Algae prepare food for fungi and fungiprovide shelter and absorb mineral nutrients and water for its partner.So close is their association that if one saw a lichen in nature one would
never imagine that they had two different organisms within them.  Lichensare very good pollution indicators Œ they do not grow in polluted areas.
28BIOLOGYEXERCISES1.Discuss how classification systems have undergone several changes over aperiod of time?2.State two economically important uses of:(a) heterotrophic bacteria
(b) archaebacteria3.What is the nature of cell-walls in diatoms?4.Find out what do the terms ‚algal bloom™ and ‚red-tides™ signify.5.How are viroids different from viruses?6.Describe briefly the four major groups of Protozoa.7.Plants are autotrophic. Can you think of some plants that are partiallyheterotrophic?8.What do the terms phycobiont and mycobiont signify?9.Give a comparative account of the classes of Kingdom Fungi under the following: (i)mode of nutrition(ii)mode of reproduction10.What are the characteristic features of Euglenoids?11.Give a brief account of viruses with respect to their structure and nature ofgenetic material. Also name four common viral diseases.12.Organise a discussion in your class on the topic Œ Are viruses living or non-living?
