84BIOLOGYYou can very easily see the structural similarities and variations in theexternal morphology of the larger living organism, both plants and
animals. Similarly, if we were to study the internal structure, one also
finds several similarities as well as differences. This chapter introduces
you to the internal structure and functional organisation of higher plants.
Study of internal structure of plants is called anatomy. Plants have cells
as the basic unit, cells are organised into tissues and in turn the tissues
are organised into organs. Different organs in a plant show differences in
their internal structure. Within angiosperms, the monocots and dicots
are also seen to be anatomically different. Internal structures also show
adaptations to diverse environments.6.1THE TISSUESA tissue is a group of cells having a common origin and usually performinga common function. A plant is made up of different kinds of tissues. Tissues
are classified into two main groups, namely, meristematic  and permanent
tissues based on whether the cells being formed are capable of dividing
or not.6.1.1Meristematic TissuesGrowth in plants is largely restricted to specialised regions of active cell divisioncalled meristems (Gk. meristos: divided). Plants have different kinds ofmeristems. The meristems which occur at the tips of roots and shoots and
produce primary tissues are called apical meristems (Figure 6.1).ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTSCHAPTER  66.1The Tissues6.2The Tissue
System6.3Anatomy of
Dicotyledonous
and
Monocotyledonous
Plants6.4Secondary
Growth
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS85Root apical meristem occupies the tip of a root while the shoot apicalmeristem occupies the distant most region of the stem axis. During theformation of leaves and elongation of stem, some cells ‚left behind™ fromshoot apical meristem, constitute the axillary bud. Such buds are presentin the axils of leaves and are capable of forming a branch or a flower. The
meristem which occurs between mature tissues is known as intercalarymeristem. They occur in grasses and regenerate parts removed by the
grazing herbivores. Both apical meristems and intercalary meristems areprimary meristems because they appear early in life of a plant andcontribute to the formation of the primary plant body.The meristem that occurs in the mature regions of roots and shoots ofmany plants, particularly those that produce woody axis and appear
later than primary meristem is called the secondary or lateral meristem.They are cylindrical meristems. Fascicular vascular cambium,
interfascicular cambium and cork-cambium are examples of lateralmeristems. These are responsible for producing the secondary tissues.Following divisions of cells in both primary and as well as secondarymeristems, the newly formed cells become structurally and functionallyspecialised and lose the ability to divide. Such cells are termed permanentor mature cells and constitute the permanent tissues. During theformation of the primary plant body, specific regions of the apical meristemproduce dermal tissues, ground tissues and vascular tissues.Central cylinderCortexProtoderm
Initials of centralcylinderand cortexInitials ofrootcap
Root capRoot apicalmeristemLeaf primordium
Shoot apicalMeristematic zoneAxillary budDifferentiating

vascular tissueFigure 6.1  Apical meristem: (a) Root  (b) Shoot
86BIOLOGY6.1.2Permanent TissuesThe cells of the permanent tissues do not generallydivide further. Permanent tissues having all cells
similar in structure and function are called simpletissues. Permanent tissues having many differenttypes of cells are called complex tissues.6.1.2.1Simple TissuesA simple tissue is made of only one type of cells.
The various simple tissues in plants are
parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma
(Figure 6.2). Parenchyma forms the  majorcomponent within organs. The cells of the
parenchyma  are generally isodiametric. They
may be spherical, oval, round, polygonal or
elongated in shape. Their walls are thin and made
up of cellulose. They may either be closely packed
or have small intercellular spaces. The
parenchyma performs  various functions like
photosynthesis, storage, secretion.The collenchyma occurs in layers below theepidermis in dicotyledonous plants. It is found
either as a homogeneous layer or in patches. It
consists of cells which are much thickened at the
corners due to a deposition of cellulose,
hemicellulose and pectin. Collenchymatous cells
may be oval, spherical or polygonal and often
contain chloroplasts. These cells assimilate food
when they contain chloroplasts. Intercellular
spaces are absent. They provide mechanical
support to the growing parts of the plant such as
young stem and petiole of a leaf.Sclerenchyma consists of long, narrow cellswith thick and lignified cell walls having a few or
numerous pits. They are usually dead and without
protoplasts. On the basis of variation in form,
structure, origin and development, sclerenchyma
may be either fibres or sclereids. The fibres arethick-walled, elongated and pointed cells,
generally occuring in groups, in various parts of
the plant. The sclereids are spherical, oval orcylindrical, highly thickened dead cells with veryIntercelluar spaceFigure 6.2Simple tissues :(a) Parenchyma(b) Collenchyma
(c) SclerenchymaA fibreA sclereid(c)LumenThickcell wallLumenPitsThick
cell wall(b)Thickened cornersProtoplasmVacuoleCell wall(a)
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS87narrow cavities (lumen). These are commonly found in the fruitwalls of nuts; pulp of fruits like guava, pear and sapota; seed
coats of legumes and leaves of tea. Sclerenchyma provides
mechanical support to organs.6.1.2.2Complex TissuesThe complex tissues are made of more than one type of cellsand these work together as a unit. Xylem and phloem constitute
the complex tissues in plants (Figure 6.3).Xylem functions as a conducting tissue for water andminerals from roots to the stem and leaves. It also provides
mechanical strength to the plant parts. It is composed of four
different kinds of elements, namely, tracheids, vessels, xylemfibres and xylem parenchyma. Gymnosperms lack vessels in
their xylem. Tracheids are elongated or tube like cells withthick and lignified walls and tapering ends. These are dead and
are without protoplasm. The inner layers of the cell walls have
thickenings which vary in form.  In flowering plants, tracheids
and vessels are the main water transporting elements. Vessel isa long cylindrical tube-like structure made up of many cells
called vessel members, each with lignified walls and a large
central cavity. The vessel cells are also devoid of protoplasm.
Vessel members are interconnected through perforations in their
common walls. The presence of vessels is a characteristic feature
of angiosperms. Xylem fibres have highly thickened walls andobliterated central lumens. These may either be septate or
aseptate. Xylem parenchyma cells are living and thin-walled,and their cell walls are made up of cellulose. They store food
materials in the form of starch or fat, and other substances like
tannins. The radial conduction of water takes place by the ray
parenchymatous cells.Primary xylem is of two types Œ protoxylem and metaxylem.The first formed primary xylem elements are called protoxylemand the later formed primary xylem is called metaxylem. Instems, the protoxylem lies towards the centre (pith) and the
metaxylem lies towards the periphery of the organ. This type
of primary xylem is called endarch. In roots, the protoxylemlies towards periphery and metaxylem lies towards the centre.
Such arrangement of primary xylem is called exarch.Phloem transports food materials, usually from leaves toother parts of the plant. Phloem in angiosperms is composed
of sieve tube elements, companion cells, phloem parenchymaPhloemparenchymaCompanioncell(b)Sieve poreSieve tubeelementFigure 6.3 (a) Xylem      (b) Phloem(a)TracheidVessels
88BIOLOGYand phloem fibres. Gymnosperms have albuminous cells and sieve cells.They lack sieve tubes and companion cells. Sieve tube elements arealso long, tube-like structures, arranged  longitudinally and are
associated with the companion cells. Their end walls are perforated in asieve-like manner to form the sieve plates. A mature sieve elementpossesses a peripheral cytoplasm and a large vacuole but lacks a nucleus.The functions of sieve tubes are controlled by the nucleus of companioncells. The companion cells are specialised parenchymatous cells, whichare closely associated with sieve tube elements. The sieve tube elements
and companion cells are connected by pit fields present between theircommon longitudinal walls. The companion cells help in maintaining thepressure gradient in the sieve tubes. Phloem parenchyma is made upof elongated, tapering cylindrical cells which have dense cytoplasm and
nucleus. The cell wall is composed of cellulose and has pits through whichplasmodesmatal connections exist between the cells. The phloemparenchyma stores food material and other substances like resins, latexand mucilage. Phloem parenchyma is absent in most of themonocotyledons. Phloem fibres (bast fibres) are made up ofsclerenchymatous cells. These are generally absent in the primary phloem
but are found in the secondary phloem. These are much elongated,unbranched and have pointed, needle like apices. The cell wall of phloemfibres is quite thick. At maturity, these fibres lose their protoplasm andbecome dead. Phloem fibres of jute, flax and hemp are used commercially.The first formed primary phloem consists of narrow sieve tubes and isreferred to as protophloem and the later formed phloem has bigger sievetubes and is referred to as metaphloem.6.2THE TISSUE SYSTEMWe were discussing types of tissues based on the types of cells present.Let us now consider how tissues vary depending on their location in theplant body. Their structure and function would also be dependent onlocation. On the basis of their structure and location, there are three typesof tissue systems. These are the epidermal tissue system, the ground orfundamental tissue system and the vascular or conducting tissue system.6.2.1Epidermal Tissue SystemThe epidermal tissue system forms the outer-most covering of the whole
plant body and comprises epidermal cells, stomata and the epidermalappendages Œ the trichomes and hairs. The epidermis is the outermostlayer of the primary plant body. It is made up of elongated, compactly
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS89The cells of epidermis bear a number of hairs. The root hairs areunicellular elongations of the epidermal cells and help absorb water andminerals from the soil. On the stem the epidermal hairs are calledtrichomes. The trichomes in the shoot system are usually multicellular.They may be branched  or unbranched and soft or stiff. They may even
be secretory. The trichomes help in preventing water loss due totranspiration.6.2.2The Ground Tissue SystemAll tissues except epidermis and vascular bundles constitute the groundtissue. It consists of simple tissues such as parenchyma, collenchymaand sclerenchyma. Parenchymatous cells are usually present in cortex,pericycle, pith and medullary rays, in the primary stems and roots. Inleaves, the ground tissue consists of thin-walled chloroplast containingcells and is called mesophyll.arranged cells, which form a continuous layer. Epidermis is usually single-layered. Epidermal cells are parenchymatous with a small amount ofcytoplasm lining the cell wall and a large vacuole. The outside of theepidermis is often covered with a waxy thick layer called the cuticle whichprevents the loss of water. Cuticle is absent in roots. Stomata are structurespresent in the epidermis of leaves. Stomata regulate the process oftranspiration and gaseous exchange. Each stoma is composed of two bean-shaped cells known as guard cells which enclose stomatal pore. In grasses,the guard cells are dumb-bell shaped. The outer walls of guard cells (away
from the stomatal pore) are thin and the inner walls (towards the stomatalpore) are highly thickened. The guard cells possess chloroplasts andregulate the opening and closing of stomata. Sometimes, a few epidermalcells, in the vicinity of the guard cells become specialised in their shape andsize and are known as subsidiary cells. The stomatal aperture, guardcells and the surrounding subsidiary cells are together called stomatalapparatus (Figure 6.4).Figure 6.4Diagrammatic representation: (a) stomata with bean-shaped guard cells(b) stomata with dumb-bell shaped guard cellEpidermal cellsSubsidiary cellsGuard cellsStomatalporeChloroplast
90BIOLOGY6.2.3The Vascular Tissue SystemThe vascular system consists of complex tissues,the phloem and the xylem.The xylem andphloem together constitute vascular bundles(Figure 6.5). In dicotyledonous stems, cambiumis present between phloem and xylem. Such
vascular bundles because of the presence ofcambium possess the ability to form secondaryxylem and phloem tissues, and hence are calledopen vascular bundles. In the monocotyledons,the vascular bundles have no cambium present
in them. Hence, since they do not form secondarytissues they are referred to as closed. Whenxylem and phloem within a vascular bundle are
arranged in an alternate manner on differentradii, the arrangement is called radial such asin roots. In conjoint type of vascular bundles,the xylem and phloem are situated at the sameradius of vascular bundles. Such vascularbundles are common in stems and leaves. Theconjoint vascular bundles usually have thephloem located only on the outer side of xylem.6.3ANATOMY OF DICOTYLEDONOUS ANDMONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTSFor a better understanding of tissueorganisation of roots, stems and leaves, it isconvenient to study the transverse sections ofthe mature zones of these organs.6.3.1Dicotyledonous RootLook at Figure 6.6 (a), it shows the transversesection of the sunflower root. The internal tissueorganisation is as follows:The outermost layer is epidermis. Many ofthe epidermal cells protrude in the form ofunicellular root hairs. The cortex consists ofseveral layers of thin-walled parenchyma cellsFigure 6.5Various types of vascular bundles :(a) radial  (b) conjoint closed(c) conjoint open
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS91with intercellular spaces. The innermost layerof the cortex is called endodermis. Itcomprises a single layer of barrel-shaped cells
without any intercellular spaces. The
tangential as well as radial walls of the
endodermal cells have a deposition of water-
impermeable, waxy material-suberin-in the
form of casparian strips. Next to endodermislies a few layers of thick-walled
parenchyomatous cells referred to as
pericycle.  Initiation of lateral roots andvascular cambium during the secondary
growth takes place in these cells. The pith is
small or inconspicuous. The parenchymatous
cells which lie between the xylem and the
phloem are called conjuctive tissue. Thereare usually two to four xylem and phloem
patches. Later, a cambium ring develops
between the xylem and phloem. All tissues
on the innerside of the endodermis such as
pericycle, vascular bundles and pith
constitute the stele.6.3.2Monocotyledonous RootThe anatomy of the monocot root is similar to
the dicot root in many respects (Figure 6.6 b).It has epidermis, cortex, endodermis,
pericycle, vascular bundles and pith. As
compared to the dicot root which have fewer
xylem bundles, there are usually more than
six (polyarch) xylem bundles in the monocot
root. Pith is large and well developed.
Monocotyledonous roots do not undergo any
secondary growth.6.3.3Dicotyledonous StemThe transverse section of a typical youngdicotyledonous stem shows that the epidermisis the outermost protective layer of the stemRoot hairEpidermisCortexEndodermisProtoxylemMetaxylemPithPhloem(a)PericycleRoot hairCortexEndodermisPhloemProtoxylemPithMetaxylem(b)EpidermisPericycleFigure 6.6T.S. : (a) Dicot root (Primary)(b) Monocot root
92BIOLOGY(Figure 6.7 a). Covered with a thin layer of cuticle, it may bear trichomes anda few stomata. The cells arranged in multiple layers between epidermis andpericycle constitute the cortex. It consists of three sub-zones. The outerhypodermis, consists of a few layers of collenchymatous cells just below theepidermis, which provide mechanical strength to the young stem. Corticallayers below hypodermis consist of rounded thin walled parenchymatouscells with conspicuous intercellular spaces. The innermost layer of the cortex
is called the endodermis. The cells of the endodermis are rich in starchgrains and the layer is also referred to as the starch sheath. Pericycle isFigure 6.7  T.S. of stem :  (a) Dicot  (b) Monocot
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS93present on the inner side of the endodermis and above the phloem in theform of semi-lunar patches of sclerenchyma. In between the vascular bundlesthere are a few layers of radially placed parenchymatous cells, which constitutemedullary rays. A large number of vascular bundles are arrangedin a ring ;
the ‚ring™ arrangement of vascular bundles is a characteristic of dicot stem.Each vascular bundle is conjoint, open, and with endarch protoxylem. A
large number of rounded, parenchymatous cells with large intercellular
spaces which occupy the central portion of the stem constitute the pith.6.3.4Monocotyledonous StemThe monocot stem has a sclerenchymatous hypodermis, a large number
of scattered vascular bundles, each surrounded by a sclerenchymatous
bundle sheath, and a large, conspicuous parenchymatous ground tissue
(Figure 6.7b). Vascular bundles are conjoint  and closed. Peripheral
vascular bundles are generally smaller than the centrally located ones.
The phloem parenchyma is absent, and water-containing cavities are
present within the vascular bundles.6.3.5Dorsiventral (Dicotyledonous) LeafThe vertical section of a dorsiventral leaf through the lamina shows threemain parts, namely, epidermis, mesophyll and vascular system. Theepidermis which covers both the upper surface (adaxial epidermis) andlower  surface (abaxial epidermis) of the leaf has a conspicuous cuticle.
The abaxial epidermis generally bears more stomata than the adaxial
epidermis. The latter may even lack stomata. The tissue between the upper
and the lower epidermis is called the mesophyll. Mesophyll, whichpossesses chloroplasts and carry out photosynthesis, is made up ofparenchyma. It has two types of cells Œ the palisade parenchyma andthe spongy parenchyma. The adaxially placed palisade parenchyma ismade up of elongated cells, which are arranged vertically and parallel to
each other. The oval or round and loosely arranged spongy parenchyma
is situated below the palisade cells and extends to the lower epidermis.
There are numerous large spaces and air cavities between these cells.
Vascular system includes vascular bundles, which can be seen in theveins and the midrib. The size of the vascular bundles are dependent on
the size of the veins. The veins vary in thickness in the reticulate venation
of the dicot leaves. The vascular bundles are surrounded by a layer of
thick walled bundle sheath cells. Look at Figure 6.8 (a) and find theposition of xylem in the vascular bundle.6.3.6Isobilateral (Monocotyledonous) LeafThe anatomy of isobilateral leaf is similar to that of the dorsiventral leaf inmany ways. It shows the following characteristic differences. In an
