UNIT 5The reductionist  approach to study of life forms resulted in increasinguse of physico-chemical concepts and techniques. Majority of these
studies employed either surviving tissue model or straightaway cell-
free systems. An explosion of knowledge resulted in molecular biology.
Molecular physiology became almost synonymous with biochemistry
and biophysics. However, it is now being increasingly realised that
neither a purely organismic approach nor a purely reductionistic
molecular approach would reveal the truth about biological processes
or living phenomena. Systems biology makes us believe that all living
phenomena are emergent properties due to interaction among
components of the system under study. Regulatory network of molecules,
supra molecular assemblies, cells, tissues, organisms and indeed,
populations and communities, each create emergent properties. In the
chapters under this unit, major human physiological processes like
digestion, exchange of gases, blood circulation, locomotion and
movement are described in cellular and molecular terms. The last two
chapters point to the coordination and regulation of body events at the
organismic level.HUMAN PHYSIOLOGYChapter 16Digestion and AbsorptionChapter 17Breathing and Exchange
of GasesChapter 18Body Fluids and
CirculationChapter 19Excretory Products and
their EliminationChapter 20Locomotion and MovementChapter 21Neural Control and
CoordinationChapter 22Chemical Coordination
and Integration
ALFONSO CORTI, Italian anatomist, was born in 1822. Corti beganhis scientific career studying the cardiovascular systems ofreptiles. Later, he turned his attention to the mammalian
auditory system. In 1851, he published a paper describing a
structure located on the basilar membrane of the cochlea
containing hair cells that convert sound vibrations into nerve
impulses, the organ of Corti. He died in the year 1888.Alfonso Corti(1822 Œ 1888)
Food is one of the basic requirements of all living organisms. The majorcomponents of our food are carbohydrates, proteins and fats. Vitamins
and minerals are also required in small quantities. Food provides energy
and organic materials for growth and repair of tissues. The water we take
in, plays an important role in metabolic processes and also prevents
dehydration of the body. Biomacromolecules in food cannot be utilised
by our body in their original form. They have to be broken down and
converted into simple substances in the digestive system. This process of
conversion of complex food substances to simple absorbable forms is
called digestion and is carried out by our digestive system by mechanicaland biochemical methods. General organisation of the human digestive
system is shown in Figure 16.1.16.1DIGESTIVE SYSTEMThe human digestive system consists of the alimentary canal and theassociated glands.16.1.1Alimentary CanalThe alimentary canal begins with an anterior opening Œ the mouth, and itopens out posteriorly through the anus. The mouth leads to the buccal
cavity or oral cavity. The oral cavity has a number of teeth and a muscular
tongue. Each tooth is embedded in a socket of jaw bone (Figure16.2).
This type of attachment is called thecodont. Majority of mammalsincluding human being forms two sets of teeth during their life, a set ofDIGESTION AND ABSORPTIONCHAPTER  1616.1DigestiveSystem16.2Digestion of
Food16.3Absorption of
Digested
Products16.4Disorders of
Digestive
System
258BIOLOGYPancreasJejunumAscendingcolonTransversecolonDuodenumGall bladderLiverIleumCaecumVermiformappendixAnusRectumDescendingcolonOral cavityMouthSubmaxillary andsublingual glandsParotidglandPharynxOesophagusStomachFigure 16.1 The human digestive systemtemporary milk or deciduous teeth replaced by a set of permanent oradult teeth. This type of dentition is called diphyodont. An adult humanhas 32 permanent teeth which are of four different types (Heterodont
dentition), namely, incisors (I), canine (C), premolars (PM) and molars
(M). Arrangement of teeth in each half of the upper and lower jaw in the
order I, C, PM, M is represented by a dental formula which in humanis 2123
2123
. The hard chewing surface of the teeth, made up of enamel, helpsin the mastication of food. The tongue is a freely movable muscular organattached to the floor of the oral cavity by the frenulum. The upper surface
of the tongue has small projections called papillae, some of which bear
taste buds.The oral cavity leads into a short pharynx which serves as a commonpassage for food and air. The oesophagus and the trachea (wind pipe)
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION259open into the pharynx. A cartilaginous flapcalled epiglottis prevents the entry of foodinto the glottis Œ opening of the wind pipe Œduring swallowing. The oesophagus is athin, long tube which extends posteriorlypassing through the neck, thorax anddiaphragm and leads to a ‚J™ shaped bag likestructure called stomach. A muscularsphincter (gastro-oesophageal) regulates theopening of oesophagus into the stomach.The stomach, located in the upper leftportion of the abdominal cavity, has threemajor parts Œ a cardiac portion into whichthe oesophagus opens, a fundic region anda pyloric portion which opens into the firstpart of small intestine (Figure 16.3). Small
intestine is distinguishable into threeregions, a ‚C™ shaped duodenum, a longcoiled middle portion jejunum and a highlycoiled ileum. The opening of the stomachinto the duodenum is guarded by the pyloricsphincter. Ileum opens into the largeintestine. It consists of caecum, colon andrectum. Caecum is a small blind sac whichhosts some symbiotic micro-organisms. Anarrow finger-like tubular projection, thevermiform appendix which is a vestigialorgan, arises from the caecum. The caecumopens into the colon. The colon is dividedinto three parts Œ an ascending, a transverseand a descending part. The descending partopens into the rectum which opens outthrough the anus.The wall of alimentary canal fromoesophagus to rectum possesses four layers
(Figure 16.4) namely serosa, muscularis,sub-mucosa and mucosa. Serosa is theoutermost layer and is made up of a thinmesothelium (epithelium of visceral organs)with some connective tissues. Muscularis isformed by smooth muscles usuallyarranged into an inner circular and an outerlongitudinal layer. An oblique muscle layermay be present in some regions. The sub-mucosal layer is formed of loose connectiveFigure 16.3Anatomical regions of humanstomachFigure 16.2Arrangement of different types of
teeth in the jaws on one side andthe sockets on the other side
260BIOLOGYFigure 16.4 Diagrammatic representation of transverse section of guttissues containing nerves, blood and lymphvessels. In duodenum, glands are also present insub-mucosa. The innermost layer lining thelumen of the alimentary canal is the mucosa. Thislayer forms irregular folds (rugae) in the stomachand small finger-like foldings called villi in thesmall intestine (Figure 16.5). The cells lining the
villi produce numerous microscopic projectionscalled microvilli giving a brush borderappearance. These modifications increase thesurface area enormously. Villi are supplied witha network of capillaries and a large lymph vesselcalled the lacteal. Mucosal epithelium has gobletcells which secrete mucus that help in lubrication.Mucosa also forms glands in the stomach (gastricglands) and crypts in between the bases of villi inthe intestine (crypts of Lieberkuhn). All the fourlayers show modifications in different parts of thealimentary canal.16.1.2Digestive GlandsThe digestive glands associated with the alimentary canal include the
salivary glands, the liver and the pancreas.Saliva is mainly produced by three pairs of salivary glands, the parotids(cheek), the sub-maxillary/sub-mandibular (lower jaw) and the sub-
linguals (below the tongue). These glands situated just outside the buccal
cavity secrete salivary juice into the buccal cavity.Figure 16.5A section of small intestinalmucosa showing villiVilli
LactealCapillariesCryptsArteryVein

DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION261Liver is the largest gland of the body weighing about 1.2 to 1.5 kg inan adult human. It is situated in the abdominal cavity, just below thediaphragm and has two lobes. The hepatic lobules are the structural andfunctional units of liver containing hepatic cells arranged in the form ofcords. Each lobule is covered by a thin connective tissue sheath calledthe Glisson™s capsule. The bile secreted by the hepatic cells passes throughthe hepatic ducts and is stored and concentrated in a thin muscular saccalled the gall bladder. The duct of gall bladder (cystic duct) along withthe hepatic duct from the liver forms the common bile duct (Figure 16.6).Figure 16.6 The duct systems of liver, gall bladder and pancreasThe bile duct and the pancreatic duct open together into the duodenumas the common hepato-pancreatic duct which is guarded by a sphinctercalled the sphincter of Oddi.The pancreas is a compound (both exocrine and endocrine) elongatedorgan situated between the limbs of the ‚U™ shaped duodenum. Theexocrine portion secretes an alkaline pancreatic juice containing enzymesand the endocrine portion secretes hormones, insulin and glucagon.16.2DIGESTION OF FOODThe process of digestion is accomplished by mechanical and chemicalprocesses.The buccal cavity performs two major functions, mastication of foodand facilitation of swallowing. The teeth and the tongue with the help of
262BIOLOGYsaliva masticate and mix up the food thoroughly. Mucus in saliva helpsin lubricating and adhering the masticated food particles into a bolus.The bolus is then conveyed into the pharynx and then into the oesophagus
by swallowing or deglutition. The bolus further passes down throughthe oesophagus by successive waves of muscular contractions called
peristalsis. The gastro-oesophageal sphincter controls the passage of food
into the stomach.The saliva secreted into the oral cavity contains
electrolytes  and enzymes, salivary amylase andlysozyme. The chemical process of digestion is initiated in the oral cavity
by the hydrolytic action of the carbohydrate splitting enzyme, the salivary
amylase. About 30 per cent of starch is hydrolysed here by this enzyme
(optimum pH 6.8) into a disaccharide Œ maltose. Lysozyme present in
saliva acts as an antibacterial agent that prevents infections.Starch
Salivary
.Amylase
pH
Maltose
68
¾®
¾¾¾¾¾¾¾¾
The mucosa of stomach has gastric glands. Gastric glands have threemajor types of cells namely -(i)mucus neck cells which secrete mucus;(ii)peptic or chief cells which secrete the proenzyme pepsinogen; and(iii)parietal or oxyntic cells which secrete HCl and intrinsic factor
(factor essential for absorption of vitamin B12).The stomach stores the food for 4-5 hours. The food mixes thoroughlywith the acidic gastric juice of the stomach by the churning movements
of its muscular wall and is called the chyme. The proenzyme pepsinogen,on exposure to hydrochloric acid gets converted into the active enzyme
pepsin, the proteolytic enzyme of the stomach. Pepsin converts proteins
into proteoses and peptones (peptides). The mucus and bicarbonates
present in the gastric juice play an important role in lubrication and
protection of the mucosal epithelium from excoriation by the highly
concentrated hydrochloric acid. HCl provides the acidic pH (pH 1.8)
optimal for pepsins. Rennin is a proteolytic enzyme found in gastric juice
of infants which helps in the digestion of milk proteins. Small amounts of
lipases are also secreted by gastric glands.Various types of movements are generated by the muscularis layer ofthe small intestine. These movements help in a thorough mixing up of
the food with various secretions in the intestine and thereby facilitate
digestion. The bile, pancreatic juice and the intestinal juice are the
secretions released into the small intestine. Pancreatic juice and bile are
released through the hepato-pancreatic duct. The pancreatic juice
contains inactive enzymes Œ trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen,
procarboxypeptidases, amylases, lipases and nucleases. Trypsinogen is
activated by an enzyme, enterokinase, secreted by the intestinal mucosa
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION263into active trypsin, which in turn activates the other enzymes in thepancreatic juice. The bile released into the duodenum contains bile
pigments (bilirubin and bili-verdin), bile salts, cholesterol and
phospholipids but no enzymes. Bile helps in emulsification of fats, i.e.,
breaking down of the fats into very small micelles. Bile also activates lipases.The intestinal mucosal epithelium has goblet cells which secrete mucus.The secretions of the brush border cells of the mucosa alongwith the
secretions of the goblet cells constitute the intestinal juice orsuccus entericus. This juice contains a variety of enzymes likedisaccharidases (e.g., maltase), dipeptidases, lipases, nucleosidases, etc.The mucus alongwith the bicarbonates from the pancreas protects theintestinal mucosa from acid as well as provide an alkaline medium (pH
7.8) for enzymatic activities. Sub-mucosal glands (Brunner™s glands) alsohelp in this.Proteins, proteoses and peptones (partially hydrolysed proteins) inthe chyme reaching the intestine are acted upon by the proteolytic
enzymes of pancreatic juice as given below:Proteins

Peptones
Proteoses
Trypsin/Chymotrypsin
Carboxyp
üýïþïeeptidase
Di
peptides
¾®¾¾¾¾¾¾¾¾¾¾¾
Carbohydrates in the chyme are hydrolysed by pancreatic amylaseinto disaccharides.Polysaccharidesstarch
Disaccharides
Amylase
()
¾®
¾¾¾¾¾
Fats are broken down by lipases with the help of bile into di-andmonoglycerides.Fats
DiglyceridesMonoglycerides
Lipases
¾®¾¾¾¾
¾®¾
Nucleases in the pancreatic juice acts on nucleic acids to formnucleotides and nucleosidesNucleicacids
NucleotidesNucleosides
Nucleases
¾®¾¾¾¾¾
¾®¾
The enzymes  in the succus entericus act on the end products of theabove reactions to form the respective simple absorbable forms. These
final steps in digestion occur very close to the mucosal epithelial cells of
the intestine.
264BIOLOGYDipeptides
Dipeptidases
¾®¾¾¾¾¾¾
Amino acids
Maltose
Maltase
¾®¾¾¾¾
Glucose+Glucose
Lactose
Glucose+alactose
Lactase
¾®¾¾¾¾
GSucrose
Fructose
Sucrase
¾®¾¾¾¾+
Glucose
Nucleotides
Nucleosides
Nucleotidases
Nucleosidases
¾®¾¾¾¾¾¾¾
¾®®¾¾¾¾¾¾¾+
SugarsBases
DiandMonoglycerides
FattyacidsGlycerol
Lipases
¾®
¾¾¾¾
+The breakdown of biomacromolecules mentioned above occurs in theduodenum region of the small intestine. The simple substances thusformed are absorbed in the jejunum and ileum regions of the small
intestine. The undigested and unabsorbed substances are passed on to
the large intestine.No significant digestive activity occurs in the large intestine. Thefunctions of large intestine are:(i)absorption of some water, minerals and certain drugs;(ii)secretion of mucus which helps in adhering the waste (undigested)
particles together and lubricating it for an easy passage.The undigested, unabsorbed substances called faeces enters into thecaecum of the large intestine through ileo-caecal valve, which prevents
the back flow of the faecal matter.  It is temporarily stored in the rectum
till defaecation.The activities of the gastro-intestinal tract are under neural andhormonal control for proper coordination of different parts. The sight,
smell and/or the presence of food in the oral cavity can stimulate the
secretion of saliva. Gastric and intestinal secretions are also, similarly,
stimulated by neural signals. The muscular activities of different parts of
the alimentary canal can also  be moderated by neural mechanisms, both
local and through CNS. Hormonal control of the secretion of digestive
juices is carried out by local hormones produced by the gastric and
intestinal mucosa.16.3ABSORPTION OF DIGESTED PRODUCTSAbsorption is the process by which the end products of digestion passthrough the intestinal mucosa into the blood or lymph. It is carried out by
passive, active or facilitated transport mechanisms. Small amounts of
monosaccharides like glucose, amino acids and some electrolytes like
chloride ions are generally absorbed by simple diffusion. The passage of
these substances into the blood depends upon the concentration gradients.
However, some substances like glucose and amino acids are absorbed with
the help of carrier proteins. This mechanism is called the facilitated transport.
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION265Transport of water depends upon the osmotic gradient. Activetransport occurs against the concentration gradient and hence requiresenergy. Various nutrients like amino acids, monosaccharides like glucose,
electrolytes like Na+ are absorbed into the blood by this mechanism.Fatty acids and glycerol being insoluble, cannot be absorbed into theblood. They are first incorporated into small droplets called micelles which
move into the intestinal mucosa. They are re-formed into very small proteincoated fat globules called the chylomicrons which are transported intothe lymph vessels (lacteals) in the villi. These lymph vessels ultimately
release the absorbed substances into the blood stream.Absorption of substances takes place in different parts of the alimentarycanal, like mouth, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. However,
maximum absorption occurs in the small intestine. A summary of
absorption (sites of absorption and substances absorbed) is given inTable 16.1.The absorbed substances finally reach the tissues which utilise themfor their activities. This process is called assimilation.The digestive wastes, solidified into coherent faeces in the rectuminitiate a neural reflex causing an urge or desire for its removal. The
egestion of faeces to the outside through the anal opening (defaecation) isa voluntary process and is carried out by a mass peristaltic movement.16.4DISORDERS OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEMThe inflammation of the intestinal tract is the most common ailment dueto bacterial or viral infections. The infections are also caused by the
parasites of the intestine like tapeworm, roundworm, threadworm,
hookworm, pin worm, etc.Jaundice: The liver is affected, skin and eyes turn yellow due to thedeposit of bile pigments.StomachAbsorption ofwater, simple
sugars, andalcohol etc.takes place.Small IntestinePrincipal organ for absorptionof nutrients.  The digestion iscompleted here and the finalproducts of digestion such as
glucose, fructose, fatty acids,glycerol and amino acids areabsorbed through the mucosainto the blood stream andlymph.MouthCertain drugscoming in contactwith the mucosaof mouth andlower side of thetongue are
absorbed into theblood capillarieslining them.Large IntestineAbsorption ofwater, someminerals anddrugs takesplace.TABLE 16.1 The Summary of Absorption in Different Parts of Digestive System
266BIOLOGYVomiting:  It is the ejection of stomach contents through the mouth.This reflex action is controlled by the vomit centre in the medulla. A feelingof nausea precedes vomiting.Diarrhoea:  The abnormal frequency of bowel movement and increasedliquidity of the faecal discharge is known as diarrhoea.  It reduces theabsorption of food.Constipation:  In constipation, the faeces are retained within the rectumas the bowel movements occur irregularly.
Indigestion:  In this condition, the food is not properly digested leading toa feeling of fullness. The causes of indigestion are inadequate enzymesecretion, anxiety, food poisoning, over eating, and spicy food.SUMMARYThe digestive system of humans consists of an alimentary canal and associated
digestive glands. The alimentary canal consists of the mouth, buccal cavity,
pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum and the
anus. The accessory digestive glands include the salivary glands, the liver (with
gall bladder) and the pancreas. Inside the mouth the teeth masticates the food,
the tongue tastes the food and manipulates it for proper mastication by mixing
with the saliva. Saliva contains a starch digestive enzyme, salivary amylase that
digests the starch and converts it into maltose (disaccharide). The food then passes
into the pharynx and enters the oesophagus in the form of bolus, which is further
carried down through the oesophagus by peristalsis into the stomach. In stomach
mainly protein digestion takes place. Absorption of simple sugars, alcohol and
medicines also takes place in the stomach.The chyme (food) enters into the duodenum portion of the small intestineand is acted on by the pancreatic juice, bile and finally by the enzymes in the
succus entericus, so that the digestion of carbohydrates, proteins and fats is
completed. The food then enters into the jejunum and ileum portions of the small
intestine. Carbohydrates are digested and converted into monosaccharides like
glucose. Proteins are finally broken down into amino acids. The fats are converted
to fatty acids and glycerol. The digested end products are absorbed into the body
through the epithelial lining of the intestinal villi. The undigested food (faeces)
enters into the caecum of the large intestine through ileo-caecal valve, which
prevents the back flow of the faecal matter. Most of the water is absorbed in the
large intestine. The undigested food becomes semi-solid in nature and then enters
into the rectum, anal canal and is finally egested out through the anus.
DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION267EXERCISES1.Choose the correct answer among the following :(a) Gastric juice contains(i)pepsin, lipase and rennin(ii)trypsin, lipase and rennin(iii)trypsin, pepsin and lipase(iv)trypsin, pepsin and renin(b) Succus entericus is the name given to(i)a junction between ileum and large intestine(ii)intestinal juice(iii)swelling in the gut(iv)appendix2.Match column I with column IIColumn IColumn II(a) Bilirubin and biliverdin(i)Parotid(b) Hydrolysis of starch(ii)Bile(c) Digestion of fat(iii)Lipases(d) Salivary gland(iv)Amylases3.Answer briefly:
(a) Why are villi present in the intestine and not in the stomach?(b) How does pepsinogen change into its active form?
(c) What are the basic layers of the wall of alimentary canal?
(d) How does bile help in the digestion of fats?4.State the role of pancreatic juice in digestion of proteins.5.Describe the process of digestion of protein in stomach.6.Give the dental formula of human beings.7.Bile juice contains no digestive enzymes, yet it is important for digestion. Why?8.Describe the digestive role of chymotrypsin. Which two other digestive enzymes
of the same category are secreted by its source gland?9.How are polysaccharides and disaccharides digested?10.What would happen if HCl were not secreted in the stomach?11.How does butter in your food get digested and absorbed in the body?12.Discuss the main steps in the digestion of proteins as the food passes through
different parts of the alimentary canal.13.Explain the term thecodont and diphyodont.14.Name different types of teeth and their number in an adult human.15.What are the functions of liver?
