302BIOLOGYMovement is one of the  significant features of living beings. Animals andplants exhibit a wide range of movements. Streaming of protoplasm inthe unicellular organisms like Amoeba is a simple form of movement.Movement of cilia, flagella and tentacles are shown by many organisms.
Human beings can move limbs, jaws, eyelids, tongue, etc. Some of themovements result in a change of place or location. Such voluntarymovements are called locomotion. Walking, running, climbing, flying,swimming are all some forms of locomotory movements. Locomotory
structures need not be different from those affecting other types ofmovements. For example, in Paramoecium, cilia helps in the movement offood through cytopharynx and in locomotion as well. Hydra can use itstentacles for capturing its prey and also use them for locomotion. We uselimbs for changes in body postures and locomotion as well. The aboveobservations suggest that movements and locomotion cannot be studiedseparately. The two may be linked by stating that all locomotions aremovements but all movements are not locomotions.Methods of locomotion performed by animals vary with their habitatsand the demand of the situation. However, locomotion is generally forsearch of food, shelter, mate, suitable breeding grounds, favourableclimatic conditions or to escape from enemies/predators.20.1TYPES OF MOVEMENTCells of the human body exhibit three main types of movements, namely,amoeboid, ciliary and muscular.LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENTCHAPTER  2020.1Types ofMovement20.2Muscle20.3Skeletal System20.4Joints20.5Disorders of
Muscular and
Skeletal System
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT303Some specialised cells in our body like macrophages and leucocytesin blood exhibit amoeboid movement. It is effected by pseudopodia formedby the streaming of protoplasm (as in Amoeba). Cytoskeletal elementslike microfilaments are also involved in amoeboid movement.Ciliary movement occurs in most of our internal tubular organs whichare lined by  ciliated epithelium. The coordinated movements of cilia in
the trachea help us in removing dust particles and some of the foreign
substances inhaled alongwith the atmospheric air. Passage of ova through
the female reproductive tract is also facilitated by the ciliary movement.Movement of our limbs, jaws, tongue, etc, require muscular movement.The contractile property of muscles are effectively used for locomotion
and other movements by human beings and majority of multicellular
organisms. Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular,
skeletal and neural systems. In this chapter, you will learn about the
types of muscles, their structure, mechanism of their contraction and
important aspects of the skeletal system.20.2MUSCLEMuscle is a specialised tissue of mesodermal origin. About 40-50 percent of the body weight of a human adult is contributed by muscles.
They have special properties like excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity. Muscles have been classified using different criteria, namely
location, appearance and nature of regulation of their activities. Based on
their location, three types of muscles are identified : (i) Skeletal (ii) Visceral
and (iii) Cardiac.Skeletal muscles are closely associated with the skeletal componentsof the body. They have a striped appearance under the microscope and
hence are called striated muscles. As their activities are under thevoluntary control of the nervous system, they are known as voluntary
muscles too. They are primarily involved in locomotory actions and
changes of body postures.Visceral muscles are located in the inner walls of hollow visceralorgans of the body like the alimentary canal, reproductive tract, etc. They
do not exhibit any striation and are smooth in appearance. Hence, they
are called  smooth muscles (nonstriated muscle). Their activities arenot under the voluntary control of the nervous system and are therefore
known as involuntary muscles. They assist, for example, in the
transportation of food through the digestive tract and gametes through
the genital tract.As the name suggests, Cardiac muscles are the muscles of heart.Many cardiac muscle cells assemble in a branching pattern to form a
304BIOLOGYcardiac muscle. Based on appearance, cardiac muscles are striated. Theyare involuntary in nature as the nervous system does not control theiractivities directly.Let us examine a skeletal muscle in detail to understand the structureand mechanism of contraction. Each organised skeletal muscle in ourbody is made of a number of muscle bundles or fascicles held togetherby a common collagenous connective tissue layer called fascia. Eachmuscle bundle  contains a number of muscle fibres (Figure 20.1). Eachmuscle fibre is lined by the plasma membrane called sarcolemmaenclosing the sarcoplasm. Muscle fibre is a syncitium as the sarcoplasmcontains many nuclei. The endoplasmic reticulum, i.e., sarcoplasmicreticulum of the muscle fibres is the store house of calcium ions. Acharacteristic feature of the muscle fibre is the presence of a large numberof parallelly arranged filaments in the sarcoplasm called myofilaments ormyofibrils. Each myofibril has alternate dark and light bands on it. Adetailed study of the myofibril has established that the striated appearanceis due to the distribution pattern of two important proteins Œ Actin andMyosin. The light bands contain actin and is called I-band or Isotropicband, whereas the dark band called ‚A™ or Anisotropic band containsFascicle(muscle bundle)Muscle fibre

(muscle cell)Sarcolemma
Blood capillaryFigure 20.1Diagrammatic cross sectional view of a muscle showing muscle bundlesand muscle fibres
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT305myosin. Both the proteins are arranged as rod-like structures, parallel toeach other and also to the longitudinal axis of the myofibrils. Actinfilaments are thinner as compared to the myosin filaments, hence arecommonly called thin and thick filaments respectively. In the centre ofeach ‚I™ band is an elastic fibre called ‚Z™ line which bisects it. The thinfilaments are firmly attached to the ‚Z™ line. The thick filaments in the‚A™ band are also held together in the middle of this band by a thin fibrousmembrane called ‚M™ line. The ‚A™ and ‚I™ bands are arranged alternatelythroughout the length of the myofibrils. The portion of the myofibrilbetween two successive ‚Z™ lines is considered as the functional unit ofcontraction and is called a sarcomere (Figure 20.2). In a resting state, theedges of thin filaments on either side of the thick filaments partially overlapthe free ends of the thick filaments leaving the central part of the thickfilaments. This central part of thick filament, not overlapped by thinfilaments is called the ‚H™ zone.Figure 20.2Diagrammatic representation of (a) anatomy of a muscle fibre showinga sarcomere (b) a sarcomere(a)(b)
306BIOLOGY20.2.1Structure of Contractile ProteinsEach actin (thin) filament is made of two ‚F™ (filamentous) actinshelically wound to each other. Each ‚F™ actin is a polymer of monomeric‚G™ (Globular) actins. Two filaments of another protein, tropomyosinalso run close to the ‚F™ actins throughout its length. A complex proteinTroponin is distributed at regular intervals on the tropomyosin. In theresting state a subunit of troponin masks the active binding sites formyosin on the actin filaments (Figure 20.3a).Each myosin (thick) filament is also a polymerised protein. Manymonomeric proteins called Meromyosins (Figure 20.3b) constitute onethick filament. Each meromyosin has two important parts, a globularhead with a short arm and a tail, the former being called the heavymeromyosin (HMM) and the latter, the light meromyosin (LMM). The HMMcomponent, i.e.; the head and short arm projects outwards at regulardistance and angle from each other from the surface of a polymerised myosin
filament and is known as cross arm. The globular head is an active ATPaseenzyme and has binding sites for ATP and active sites for actin.Figure 20.3 (a) An actin (thin) filament (b) Myosin monomer (Meromyosin)Actin binding sitesATP binding sites
HeadCross arm
(a)(b)20.2.2Mechanism of Muscle ContractionMechanism of muscle contraction is best explained by the sliding filamenttheory which states that contraction of a muscle fibre takes place by thesliding of the thin filaments over the thick filaments.
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT307Muscle contraction is initiated by a signal sent by the central nervoussystem (CNS) via a motor neuron. A motor neuron alongwith the musclefibres connected to it constitute a motor unit. The junction between amotor neuron and the sarcolemma of the muscle fibre is called theneuromuscular junction or motor-end plate. A neural signal reachingthis junction releases a neurotransmitter (Acetyl choline) which generatesan action potential in the sarcolemma. This spreads through the musclefibre and causes the release of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. Increasein Ca++ level leads to the binding of calcium with a subunit of troponin onactin filaments and thereby remove the masking of active sites for myosin.
Utilising the energy from ATP hydrolysis, the myosin head now binds tothe exposed active sites on actin to form a cross bridge (Figure 20.4). Thispulls the attached actin filaments towards the centre of ‚A™ band. The‚Z™ line attached to these actins are also pulled inwards thereby causing ashortening of the sarcomere, i.e., contraction. It is clear from the abovesteps, that during shortening of the muscle, i.e., contraction, the ‚I™ bandsget reduced, whereas the ‚A™ bands retain the length (Figure 20.5). Themyosin, releasing the ADP and P1 goes back to its relaxed state. A newATP binds and the cross-bridge is broken (Figure 20.4). The ATP is again
hydrolysed by the myosin head and the cycle of cross bridge formationFigure 20.4Stages in cross bridge formation, rotation of head and breaking ofcross bridge
308BIOLOGYand breakage is repeated causing further sliding. The process continuestill the Ca++ ions are pumped back to the sarcoplasmic cisternae resultingin the masking of actin filaments. This causes the return of ‚Z™ lines back
to their original position, i.e., relaxation. The reaction time of the fibrescan vary in different muscles. Repeated activation of the muscles can leadto the accumulation of lactic acid due to anaerobic breakdown of glycogenin them, causing fatigue. Muscle contains a red coloured oxygen storingpigment called myoglobin. Myoglobin content is high in some of themuscles which gives a reddish appearance. Such muscles are called theRed fibres. These muscles also contain plenty of mitochondria which canutilise the large amount of oxygen stored in them for ATP production.These muscles, therefore, can also be called aerobic muscles. On theotherhand, some of the muscles possess very less quantity of myoglobinand therefore, appear pale or whitish. These are the White fibres. Number
of mitochondria are also few in them, but the amount of sarcoplasmicreticulum is high. They depend on anaerobic process for energy.Figure 20.5Sliding-filament theory of muscle contraction (movement of the thinfilaments and the relative size of the I band and H zones)
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT30920.3SKELETAL SYSTEMSkeletal system consists of a framework of bones and a few cartilages.This system has a significant role in movement shown by the body.
Imagine chewing food without  jaw bones and walking around without
the limb bones. Bone and cartilage are specialised connective tissues.
The former has a very hard matrix due to calcium salts in it and the latter
has slightly pliable matrix due to chondroitin salts. In human beings,
this system is made up of 206 bones and a few cartilages. It is grouped
into two principal divisions Œ the axial and the appendicular skeleton.Axial skeleton comprises 80 bones distributed along the main axisof the body. The skull, vertebral column, sternum and ribs constitute
axial skeleton. The skull (Figure 20.6) is composed of two sets of bones Œcranial and facial, that totals to 22 bones. Cranial bones are 8 in number.
They form the hard protective outer covering, cranium for the brain. The
facial region is made up of 14 skeletal elements which form the front part
of the skull. A single U-shaped bone called hyoid is present at the base of
the buccal cavity and it is also included in the skull. Each middle ear
contains three tiny bones Œ Malleus, Incus and Stapes, collectively called
Ear Ossicles. The skull region articulates with the superior region of theParietalboneFrontal bone
Temporal

boneOccipital
boneOccipital
condyleSphenoid boneEthmoid boneLacrimal boneNasal boneZygomatic boneMaxillaMandibleHyoid boneFigure 20.6 Diagrammatic view of human skull
310BIOLOGYvertebral column with the help of two occipitalcondyles (dicondylic skull).Our vertebral column (Figure 20.7) isformed by 26 serially arranged units called
vertebrae and is dorsally placed. It extends fromthe base of the skull and constitutes the mainframework of the trunk. Each vertebra has acentral hollow portion (neural canal) throughwhich the spinal cord passes. First vertebra isthe atlas and it articulates with the occipitalcondyles. The vertebral column is differentiatedinto cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral(1-fused) and coccygeal (1-fused) regionsstarting from the skull. The number of cervicalvertebrae are seven in almost all mammalsincluding human beings. The vertebral columnprotects the spinal cord, supports the head andserves as the point of attachment for the ribsand musculature of the back. Sternum is aflat bone on the ventral midline of thorax.There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each rib is athin flat bone connected dorsally to the
vertebral column and ventrally to the sternum.It has two articulation surfaces on its dorsalend and is hence called bicephalic. First sevenpairs of ribs are called true ribs. Dorsally, theyare attached to the thoracic vertebrae andventrally connected to the sternum with thehelp of hyaline cartilage. The 8th, 9th and 10thpairs of ribs do not articulate directly with the
sternum but join the seventh rib with the helpof hyaline cartilage. These are calledvertebrochondral (false) ribs. Last 2 pairs (11thand 12th) of ribs are not connected ventrallyand are therefore, called floating ribs. Thoracicvertebrae, ribs and sternum together form therib cage (Figure 20.8).The bones of the limbs alongwith theirgirdles constitute the appendicular skeleton.Each limb is made of 30 bones. The bones ofthe hand (fore limb) are humerus, radius andCervical vertebraIntervertebraldiscSacrumCoccyxThoracicvertebraLumbar
vertebraFigure 20.7  Vertebral column (right lateral view)Figure 20.8  Ribs and rib cage
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT311Figure 20.9Right pectoral girdle and upperarm. (frontal view)ulna, carpals (wrist bones Œ 8 in number),metacarpals (palm bones Œ 5 in number) andphalanges (digits Œ 14 in number) (Figure20.9). Femur (thigh bone Œ the longest bone),tibia and fibula, tarsals (ankle bones Œ 7 innumber), metatarsals (5 in number) andphalanges (digits Œ 14 in number) are thebones of the legs (hind limb) (Figure 20.10). Acup shaped bone called patella cover the kneeventrally (knee cap).Pectoral and Pelvic girdle bones help inthe articulation of the upper and the lower limbsrespectively with the axial skeleton. Eachgirdle is formed of two halves. Each half ofpectoral girdle consists of a clavicle and ascapula (Figure 20.9). Scapula is a largetriangular flat bone situated in the dorsal partof the thorax between the second and theseventh ribs. The dorsal, flat, triangular bodyof scapula has a slightly elevated ridge calledthe spine which projects as a flat, expandedprocess called the acromion. The claviclearticulates with this. Below the acromion is adepression called the glenoid cavity whicharticulates with the head of the humerus toform the shoulder joint. Each clavicle is a longslender bone with two curvatures. This boneis commonly called the collar bone.Pelvic girdle consists of two coxal bones(Figure 20.10). Each coxal bone is formed bythe fusion of three bones Œ ilium, ischium andpubis. At the point of fusion of the above bonesis a cavity called acetabulum to which the thighbone articulates. The two halves of the pelvicgirdle meet ventrally to form the pubicsymphysis containing fibrous cartilage.20.4JOINTSJoints are essential for all types of movementsinvolving the bony parts of the body.Locomotory movements are no exception toFigure 20.10Right pelvic girdle and lower limbbones (frontal view)
312BIOLOGYthis. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones andcartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movementthrough joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at thesejoints vary depending on different factors. Joints have been classified intothree major structural forms, namely, fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial.Fibrous joints do not allow any movement. This type of joint is shownby the flat skull bones which fuse end-to-end with the help of dense fibrousconnective tissues in the form of sutures, to form the cranium.In cartilaginous joints, the bones involved are joined together withthe help of cartilages. The joint between the adjacent vertebrae in the
vertebral column is of this pattern and it permits limited movements.Synovial joints are characterised by the presence of a fluid filled synovialcavity between the articulating surfaces of the two bones. Such an arragementallows considerable movement. These joints help in locomotion and manyother movements. Ball and socket joint (between humerus and pectoralgirdle), hinge joint (knee joint), pivot joint (between atlas and axis), glidingjoint (between the carpals) and saddle joint (between carpal and metacarpalof thumb) are some examples.20.5DISORDERS OF MUSCULAR AND SKELETAL SYSTEMMyasthenia gravis: Auto immune disorder affecting neuromuscularjunction leading to fatigue, weakening and paralysis of skeletal muscle.Muscular dystrophy: Progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle mostlydue to genetic disorder.
Tetany: Rapid spasms (wild contractions) in muscle due to low Ca++ inbody fluid.
Arthritis: Inflammation of joints.
Osteoporosis: Age-related disorder characterised by decreased bone massand increased chances of fractures. Decreased levels of estrogen is acommon cause.Gout: Inflammation of joints due to accumulation of uric acid crystals.SUMMARYMovement is an essential feature of all living beings. Protoplasmic streaming, ciliarymovements, movements of fins, limbs, wings, etc., are some forms exhibited by
animals. A voluntary movement which causes the animal to change its place, is
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT313called locomotion. Animals move generally in search of food, shelter, mate, breedingground, better climate or to protect themselves.The cells of the human body exhibit amoeboid, ciliary and muscularmovements. Locomotion and many other movements require coordinated muscular
activities. Three types of muscles are present in our body. Skeletal muscles are
attached to skeletal elements. They appear striated and are voluntary in nature.
Visceral muscles, present in the inner walls of visceral organs are nonstriated and
involuntary. Cardiac muscles are the muscles of the heart. They are striated,
branched and involuntary. Muscles possess excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity.Muscle fibre is the anatomical unit of muscle. Each muscle fibre has manyparallelly arranged myofibrils. Each myofibril contains many serially arranged
units called sarcomere which are the functional units. Each sarcomere has a central
‚A™ band made of thick myosin filaments, and two half ‚I™ bands made of thin actin
filaments on either side of it marked by ‚Z™  lines. Actin and myosin are polymerised
proteins with contractility. The active sites for myosin on resting actin filament are
masked by a protein-troponin. Myosin head contains ATPase and has ATP binding
sites and active sites for actin. A motor neuron carries signal to the muscle fibre
which generates an action potential in it. This causes the release of Ca++ fromsarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca++ activates actin which binds to the myosin head toform a cross bridge. These cross bridges pull the actin filaments causing them to
slide over the myosin filaments and thereby causing contraction. Ca++ are thenreturned to sarcoplasmic reticulum which inactivate the actin. Cross bridges are
broken and the muscles relax.Repeated stimulation of muscles leads to fatigue. Muscles are classified asRed and White fibres based primarily on the amount of red coloured myoglobin
pigment in them.Bones and cartilages constitute our skeletal system. The skeletal system isdivisible into axial and appendicular. Skull, vertebral column, ribs and sternum
constitute the axial skeleton. Limb bones and girdles form the appendicular
skeleton. Three types of joints are formed between bones or between bone and
cartilage Œ fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial. Synovial joints allow considerable
movements and therefore, play a significant role in locomotion.EXERCISES1.Draw the diagram of a sarcomere of skeletal muscle showing different regions.2.Define sliding filament theory of muscle contraction.3.Describe the important steps in muscle contraction.
314BIOLOGY4.Write true or false. If false change the statement so that it is true.(a) Actin is present in thin filament
(b) H-zone of striated muscle fibre represents both thick and thin filaments.
(c) Human skeleton has 206 bones.
(d) There are 11 pairs of ribs in man.
(e) Sternum is present on the ventral side of the body.5.Write the difference between :
(a) Actin and Myosin
(b) Red and White muscles
(c) Pectoral and Pelvic girdle6.Match Column I with Column II :Column IColumn II(a)Smooth muscle(i)Myoglobin(b)Tropomyosin(ii)Thin filament(c)Red muscle(iii)Sutures(d)Skull(iv)Involuntary7.What are the different types of movements exhibited by the cells of human
body?8.How do you distinguish between a skeletal muscle and a cardiac muscle?9.Name the type of joint between the following:-(a) atlas/axis
(b) carpal/metacarpal of thumb
(c) between phalanges
(d) femur/acetabulum
(e) between cranial bones
(f) between pubic bones in the pelvic girdle10.Fill in the blank spaces:
(a)All mammals (except a few) have __________ cervical vertebra.(b)The number of phalanges in each limb of human is __________(c)Thin filament of myofibril contains 2 ‚F™ actins and two other proteins namely__________ and __________.(d)In a muscle fibre Ca++ is stored in __________(e)__________ and __________ pairs of ribs are called floating ribs.(f)The human cranium is made of __________ bones.
