PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT239You have already studied the organisation of a flowering plant in Chapter5. Have you ever thought about where and how the structures like roots,stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds arise and that too in an orderlysequence? You are, by now, aware of the terms seed, seedling, plantlet,mature plant. You have also seen that trees continue to increase in heightor girth over a period of time. However, the leaves, flowers and fruits of thesame tree not only have limited dimensions but also appear and fallperiodically and some time repeatedly. Why does vegetative phase precedeflowering in a plant? All plant organs are made up of a variety of tissues;is there any relationship between the structure of a cell, a tissue, an organand the function they perform? Can the structure and the function ofthese be altered? All cells of a plant are descendents of the zygote. Thequestion is, then, why and how do they have different structural andfunctional attributes? Development is the sum of two processes: growthand differentiation. To begin with, it is essential and sufficient to knowthat the development of a mature plant from a zygote (fertilised egg) followa precise and highly ordered succession of events. During this process acomplex body organisation is formed that produces roots, leaves,branches, flowers, fruits, and seeds, and eventually they die (Figure 15.1).In this chapter, you shall also study some of the factors which governand control these developmental processes. These factors are both intrinsic(internal) and extrinsic (external) to the plant.PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENTCHAPTER  1515.1Growth15.2Differentiation,Dedifferentiation
and
Redifferentiation15.3Development15.4Plant Growth
Regulators15.5Photoperiodism15.6Vernalisation
240BIOLOGY15.1GROWTHGrowth is regarded as one of the most fundamental and conspicuouscharacteristics of a living being. What is growth? Growth can be definedas an irreversible permanent increase in size of an organ or its parts oreven of an individual cell. Generally, growth is accompanied by metabolicprocesses (both anabolic and catabolic), that occur at the expense ofenergy. Therefore, for example, expansion of a leaf is growth. How wouldyou describe the swelling of piece of wood when placed in water?15.1.1 Plant Growth Generally is IndeterminatePlant growth is unique because plants retain the capacity for unlimitedgrowth throughout their life. This ability of the plants is due to the presenceof meristems at certain locations in their body. The cells of such meristemshave the capacity to divide and self-perpetuate. The product, however,soon loses the capacity to divide and such cells make up the plant body.This form of growth wherein new cells are always being added to theplant body by the activity of the meristem is called the open form of growth.What would happen if the meristem ceases to divide? Does this everhappen?In Chapter 6, you have studied about the root apical meristem andthe shoot apical meristem. You know that they are responsible for theSeed coatEpicotylhookCotyledonsCotyledonSoil lineEpicotylHypocotylHypocotylFigure 15.1 Germination and seedling development in bean
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT241primary growth of the plants and principallycontribute to the elongation of the plants along
their axis. You also know that in dicotyledonous
plants and gymnosperms, the lateral meristems,
vascular cambium and cork-cambium appear
later in life. These are the meristems that cause
the increase in the girth of the organs in which
they are active. This is known as secondary
growth of the plant (see Figure 15.2).15.1.2Growth is MeasurableGrowth, at a cellular level, is principally aconsequence of increase in the amount of
protoplasm. Since increase in protoplasm is
difficult to measure directly, one generally
measures some quantity which is more or less
proportional to it. Growth is, therefore,
measured by a variety of parameters some of
which are: increase in fresh weight, dry weight,
length, area, volume and cell number. You may
find it amazing to know that one single maize
root apical mersitem can give rise to more than
17,500 new cells per hour, whereas cells in a
watermelon may increase in size by upto
3,50,000 times. In the former, growth is
expressed as increase in cell number; the latter
expresses growth as increase in size of the cell.
While the growth of a pollen tube is measured
in terms of its length, an increase in surface area
denotes the growth in a dorsiventral leaf.15.1.3Phases of GrowthThe period of growth is generally divided intothree phases, namely, meristematic, elongationand maturation (Figure 15.3). Let usunderstand this by looking at the root tips. Theconstantly dividing cells, both at the root apexand the shoot apex, represent the meristematicphase of growth. The cells in this region are richin protoplasm, possess large conspicuousnuclei. Their cell walls are primary in nature,thin and cellulosic with abundantplasmodesmatal connections. The cellsproximal (just next, away from the tip) to theShoot apicalmeristemVascular

cambiumVascular

cambiumRoot apicalmeristemShootRootFigure 15.2Diagrammatic representation oflocations of root apical meristem,shoot aplical meristem andvascular cambium. Arrows exhibitthe direction of growth of cells andorganGFEDCBAFigure 15.3Detection of zones of elongation by
the parallel line technique. Zones
A, B, C, D immediately behind theapex have elongated most.
242BIOLOGYmeristematic zone represent the phase of elongation. Increasedvacuolation, cell enlargement and new cell wall deposition are thecharacteristics of the cells in this phase. Further away from the apex, i.e.,more proximal to the phase of elongation, lies the portion of axis which isundergoing the phase of maturation. The cells of this zone, attain theirmaximal size in terms of wall thickening and protoplasmic modifications.Most of the tissues and cell types you have studied in Chapter 6 representthis phase.15.1.4  Growth RatesThe increased growth per unit time is termed as growth rate. Thus, rateof growth can be expressed mathematically. An organism, or a part of the
organism can produce more cells in a variety of ways.Figure15.4Diagrammatic representation of : (a) Arithmetic (b) Geometric growth and(c) Stages during embryo development showing geometric and arithematicphases
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT243The growth rate shows an increase that may bearithmetic or geometrical (Figure 15.4).In arithmetic growth, following mitotic celldivision, only one daughter cell continues to dividewhile the other differentiates and matures. The
simplest expression of arithmetic growth is
exemplified by a root elongating at a constant rate.
Look at Figure 15.5. On plotting the length of the
organ against time, a linear curve is obtained.
Mathematically, it is expressed asLt = L0 + rtLt = length at time ‚t™L0 = length at time ‚zero™r    = growth rate / elongation per unit time.Let us now see what happens in geometricalgrowth. In most systems, the initial growth is slow(lag phase), and it increases rapidly thereafter Œ at
an exponential rate (log or exponential phase). Here,
both the progeny cells following mitotic cell division
retain the ability to divide and continue to do so.
However, with limited nutrient supply, the growth
slows down leading to a stationary phase. If we plot
the parameter of growth against time, we get a typical
sigmoid or S-curve (Figure 15.6). A sigmoid curve
is a characteristic of living organism growing in a
natural environment. It is typical for all cells, tissues
and organs of a plant. Can you think of more similarexamples? What kind of a curve can you expect in
a tree showing seasonal activities?
The exponential growth can be expressed asW1 = W0 ertW1 = final size (weight, height, number etc.)W0 = initial size at the beginning of the periodr     = growth rate
t     = time of growth
e    = base of natural logarithms
Here, r is the relative growth rate and is also themeasure of the ability of the plant to produce new
plant material, referred to as efficiency index. Hence,
the final size of W1 depends on the initial size, W0.Figure 15.5Constant linear growth, a plotof length L against time tFigure 15.6An idealised sigmoid growthcurve typical of cells in culture,
and many higher plants andplant organsSize/weight of the organExponentialphaseLag phaseTime
Stationary phase
244BIOLOGYQuantitative comparisons between the growth of living system canalso be made in two ways : (i) measurement and the comparison of totalgrowth per unit time is called the absolute growth rate. (ii) The growth ofthe given system per unit time expressed on a common basis, e.g., perunit initial parameter is called the relative growth rate. In Figure 15.7two leaves, A and B, are drawn that are of different sizes but showsabsolute increase in area in the given time to give leaves, A1 and B1. However,one of them shows much higher relative growth rate. Which one and why?15.1.5Conditions for GrowthWhy do you not try to write down what you think are necessary conditionsfor growth? This list may have water, oxygen and nutrients as very essentialelements for growth. The plant cells grow in size by cell enlargement whichin turn requires water. Turgidity of cells helps in extension growth. Thus,plant growth and further development is intimately linked to the waterstatus of the plant. Water also provides the medium for enzymatic activitiesneeded for growth. Oxygen helps in releasing metabolic energy essentialfor growth activities. Nutrients (macro and micro essential elements) arerequired by plants for the synthesis of protoplasm and act as source ofenergy.In addition, every plant organism has an optimum temperature rangebest suited for its growth. Any deviation from this range could bedetrimental to its survival. Environmental signals such as light and gravityalso affect certain phases/stages of growth.Figure15.7Diagrammatic comparison of absolute and relative growth rates. Bothleaves A and B have increased their area by 5 cm2 in a given time toproduce A1, B1 leaves.
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT24515.2DIFFERENTIATION, DEDIFFERENTIATION ANDREDIFFERENTIATIONThe cells derived from root apical and shoot-apical meristems andcambium differentiate and mature to perform specific functions. This act
leading to maturation is termed as differentiation. During differentiation,cells undergo few to major structural changes both in their cell walls and
protoplasm. For example, to form a tracheary element, the cells would
lose their protoplasm. They also develop a very strong, elastic,
lignocellulosic secondary cell walls, to carry water to long distances even
under extreme tension. Try to correlate the various anatomical features
you encounter in plants to the functions they perform.Plants show another interesting phenomenon. The living differentiatedcells, that by now have lost the capacity to divide can regain the capacity
of division under certain conditions. This phenomenon is termed as
dedifferentiation. For example, formation of meristems Œ interfascicularcambium and cork cambium from fully differentiated parenchyma cells.
While doing so, such meristems/tissues are able to divide and produce
cells that once again lose the capacity to divide but mature to perform
specific functions, i.e., get redifferentiated. List some of the tissues in awoody dicotyledenous plant that are the products of redifferentiation.
How would you describe a tumour? What would you call the parenchyma
cells that are made to divide under controlled laboratory conditions during
plant tissue culture?Recall, in Section 15.1.1, we have mentioned that the growth in plantsis open, i.e., it can be indeterminate or determinate. Now, we may say that
even differentiation in plants is open, because cells/tissues arising out of
the same meristem have different structures at maturity. The final
structure at maturity of a cell/tissue is also determined by the location of
the cell within. For example, cells positioned away from root apical
meristems differentiate as root-cap cells, while those pushed to the
periphery mature as epidermis. Can you add a few more examples of
open differentiation correlating the position of a cell to  its position in an
organ?15.3 DEVELOPMENTDevelopment is a term that includes all changes that an organism goesthrough during its life cycle from germination of the seed to senescence.
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of processes which
constitute the development of a cell of a higher plant is given in Figure
15.8. It is also applicable to tissues/organs.
246BIOLOGYPlants follow different pathways in response to environment or phasesof life to form different kinds of structures. This ability is called plasticity,e.g., heterophylly in cotton, coriander and larkspur. In such plants, theleaves of the juvenile plant are different in shape from those in matureplants. On the other hand, difference in shapes of leaves produced in airand those produced in water in buttercup also represent theheterophyllous development due to environment (Figure 15.9). Thisphenomenon of heterophylly is an example of plasticity.Figure 15.8  Sequence of the developmental process in a plant cellCell DivisionDeathPlasmatic growth
Differentiation
Expansion(Elongation)MaturationMERISTEMATIC
CELLSENESCENCEMATURE
CELLFigure 15.9  Heterophylly in (a) larkspur and (b) buttercup
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT247Thus, growth, differentiation and development are very closely relatedevents in the life of a plant. Broadly, development is considered as thesum of growth and differentiation. Development in plants (i.e., both growthand differentiation) is under the control of intrinsic and extrinsic factors.The former includes both intracellular (genetic) or intercellular factors(chemicals such as plant growth regulators) while the latter includes light,temperature, water, oxygen, nutrition, etc.15.4PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS15.4.1CharacteristicsThe plant growth regulators (PGRs) are small, simple molecules of diversechemical composition. They could be indole compounds (indole-3-aceticacid, IAA); adenine derivatives (N6-furfurylamino purine, kinetin),derivatives of carotenoids (abscisic acid, ABA); terpenes (gibberellic acid,
GA3) or gases (ethylene, C2H4). Plant growth regulators are variouslydescribed as plant growth substances, plant hormones or phytohormonesin literature.The PGRs can be broadly divided into two groups based on theirfunctions in a living plant body. One group of PGRs are involved in growthpromoting activities, such as cell division, cell enlargement, patternformation, tropic growth, flowering, fruiting and seed formation. These
are also called plant growth promoters, e.g., auxins, gibberellins andcytokinins. The PGRs of the other group play an important role in plantresponses to wounds and stresses of biotic and abiotic origin. They arealso involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as dormancyand abscission. The PGR abscisic acid belongs to this group. The gaseous
PGR, ethylene, could fit either of the groups, but it is largely an inhibitorof growth activities.15.4.2  The Discovery of Plant Growth RegulatorsInterestingly, the discovery of each of the fivemajor groups of PGRs have been accidental. Allthis started with the observation of CharlesDarwin and his son Francis Darwin when theyobserved that the coleoptiles of canary grassresponded to unilateral illumination by growingtowards the light source (phototropism). Aftera series of experiments, it was concluded thatthe tip of coleoptile was the site of transmittableinfluence that caused the bending of the entirecoleoptile (Figure 15.10). Auxin was isolated byF.W. Went from tips of coleoptiles of oatseedlings.abcdFigure 15.10Experiment used to demonstratethat tip of the coleoptile is the
source of auxin. Arrows indicatedirection of light
248BIOLOGYThe ‚bakane™ (foolish seedling) disease of rice seedlings, was causedby a fungal pathogen Gibberella fujikuroi. E. Kurosawa reported theappearance of symptoms of the disease in uninfected rice seedlings whenthey were treated with sterile filtrates of the fungus. The active substances
were later identified as gibberellic acid.F. Skoog and his co-workers observed that from the internodalsegments of tobacco stems the callus (a mass of undifferentiated cells)
proliferated only if, in addition to auxins the nutrients medium was
supplemented with one of the following: extracts of vascular tissues, yeast
extract, coconut milk or DNA. Skoog and Miller, later identified and
crystallised the cytokinesis promoting active substance that they termed
kinetin.During mid-1960s, three independent researches reported thepurification and chemical characterisation of three different kinds of
inhibitors: inhibitor-B, abscission II and dormin. Later all the three were
proved to be chemically identical. It was named abscisic acid (ABA).Cousins confirmed the release of a volatile substance from ripenedoranges that hastened the ripening of stored unripened bananas. Later
this volatile substance was identified as ethylene, a gaseous PGR.Let us study some of the physiological effects of these five categoriesof PGRs in the next section.15.4.3  Physiological Effects of Plant Growth Regulators15.4.3.1AuxinsAuxins (from Greek ‚auxein™ : to grow) was first isolated from human urine.The term ‚auxin™ is applied to the indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and to other
natural and synthetic compounds having certain growth regulating
properties. They are generally produced by the growing apices of the stems
and roots, from where they migrate to the regions of their action. Auxins
like IAA and indole butyric acid (IBA) have been isolated from plants.
NAA (naphthalene acetic acid) and 2, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic)
are synthetic auxins. All these auxins have been used extensively in
agricultural and horticultural practices.They help to initiate rooting in stem cuttings, an application widelyused for plant propagation. Auxins promote flowering e.g. in pineapples.
They help to prevent fruit and leaf drop at early stages but promote the
abscission  of older mature leaves and fruits.In most higher plants, the growing apical bud inhibits the growth ofthe lateral (axillary) buds, a phenomenon called apical dominance.Removal of shoot tips (decapitation) usually results in the growth of lateral
buds (Figure 15.11). It is widely applied in tea plantations, hedge-making.
Can you explain why?
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT249Auxins also induce parthenocarpy, e.g., intomatoes. They are widely used as herbicides.2, 4-D, widely used to kill dicotyledonous
weeds, does not affect mature
monocotyledonous plants. It is used to prepare
weed-free lawns by gardeners. Auxin also
controls xylem differentiation and helps in cell
division.15.4.3.2GibberellinsGibberellins are another kind of promoteryPGR. There are more than 100 gibberellinsreported from widely different organisms such
as fungi and higher plants. They are denoted
as GA1, GA2, GA3 and so on. However,Gibberellic acid (GA3) was one of the firstgibberellins to be discovered and remains the
most intensively studied form. All GAs are
acidic. They produce a wide range of
physiological responses in the plants. Their ability to cause an increase
in length of axis is used to increase the length of grapes stalks. Gibberellins,
cause fruits like apple to elongate and improve its shape. They also delay
senescence. Thus, the fruits can be left on the tree longer so as to extend
the market period. GA3 is used to speed up the malting process in brewingindustry.Sugarcane stores carbohydrate as sugar in their stems. Sprayingsugarcane crop with gibberellins increases the length of the stem, thus
increasing the yield by as much as 20 tonnes per acre.Spraying juvenile conifers with GAs hastens the maturity period, thusleading to early seed production. Gibberellins also promotes bolting
(internode elongation just prior to flowering) in beet, cabbages and many
plants with rosette habit.15.4.3.3CytokininsCytokinins have specific effects on cytokinesis, and were discovered askinetin (a modified form of adenine, a purine) from the autoclaved herring
sperm DNA. Kinetin does not occur naturally in plants. Search for natural
substances with cytokinin-like activities led to the isolation of zeatin from
corn-kernels and coconut milk. Since the discovery of zeatin, several
naturally occurring cytokinins, and some synthetic compounds with cell
division promoting activity, have been identified. Natural cytokinins are
synthesised in regions where rapid cell division occurs, for example, root
apices, developing shoot buds, young fruits etc. It helps to produce newFigure 15.11Apical dominance in plants :(a) A plant with apical bud intact(b) A plant with apical bud removedNote the growth of lateral buds intobranches after decapitation.(a)(b)
250BIOLOGYleaves, chloroplasts in leaves, lateral shoot growth and adventitious shootformation. Cytokinins help overcome the apical dominance. They promote
nutrient mobilisation which helps in the delay of leaf senescence.15.4.3.4EthyleneEthylene is a simple gaseous PGR. It is synthesised in large amounts bytissues undergoing senescence and ripening fruits. Influences of ethyleneon plants include horizontal growth of seedlings, swelling of the axis andapical hook formation in dicot seedlings. Ethylene promotes senescenceand abscission of plant organs especially of leaves and flowers. Ethyleneis highly effective in fruit ripening. It enhances the respiration rate duringripening of the fruits. This rise in rate of respiration is called respiratoryclimactic.Ethylene breaks seed and bud dormancy, initiates germination inpeanut seeds, sprouting of potato tubers. Ethylene promotes rapidinternode/petiole elongation in deep water rice plants. It helps leaves/upper parts of the shoot to remain above water. Ethylene also promotesroot growth and root hair formation, thus helping the plants to increasetheir absorption surface.Ethylene is used to initiate flowering and for synchronising fruit-setin pineapples. It also induces flowering in mango. Since ethylene regulatesso many physiological processes, it is one of the most widely used PGR in
agriculture. The most widely used compound as source of ethylene isethephon. Ethephon in an aqueous solution is readily absorbed andtransported within the plant and releases ethylene slowly. Ethephonhastens fruit ripening in tomatoes and apples and accelerates abscissionin flowers and fruits (thinning of cotton, cherry, walnut). It promotes femaleflowers in cucumbers thereby increasing the yield.15.4.3.5Abscisic acidAs mentioned earlier, abscisic acid (ABA) was discovered for its role inregulating abscission and dormancy. But like other PGRs, it also hasother wide ranging effects on plant growth and development. It acts as ageneral plant growth inhibitor and an inhibitor of plant metabolism. ABAinhibits seed germination. ABA stimulates the closure of stomata in theepidermis and increases the tolerance of plants to various kinds of stresses.Therefore, it is also called the stress hormone. ABA plays an importantrole in seed development, maturation and dormancy. By inducingdormancy, ABA helps seeds to withstand desiccation and other factorsunfavourable for growth. In most situations, ABA acts as an antagonistto GAs.We may summarise that for any and every phase of growth,differentiation and development of plants, one or the other PGR has somerole to play. Such roles could be complimentary or antagonistic. Thesecould be individualistic or synergistic.
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT251Similarly, there are a number of events in the life of a plant wheremore than one PGR interact to affect that event, e.g., dormancy in seeds/buds, abscission, senescence, apical dominance, etc.Remember, the role of PGR is of only one kind of intrinsic control.Along with genomic control and extrinsic factors, they play an importantrole in plant growth and development. Many of the extrinsic factors suchas temperature and light, control plant growth and development via PGR.Some of such events could be: vernalisation, flowering, dormancy, seedgermination, plant movements, etc.We shall discuss briefly the role of light and temperature (both of them,the extrinsic factors) on initiation of flowering.15.5PHOTOPERIODISMIt has been observed that some plants require a periodic exposure tolight to induce flowering. It is also seen that such plants are able to
measure the duration of exposure to light. For example, some plants
require the exposure to light for a period exceeding a well defined critical
duration, while others must be exposed to light for a period less than this
critical duration before the flowering is initiated in them. The former group
of plants are called long day plants while the latter ones are termedshort day plants. The critical duration is different for different plants.There are many plants, however, where there is no such correlation
between exposure to light duration and induction of flowering response;
such plants are called day-neutral plants (Figure 15.12). It is now alsoFigure 15.12  Photoperiodism : Long day, short day and day neutral plantsLong day plantShort day plantDay neutral plant
252BIOLOGYSUMMARYGrowth is one of the most conspicuous events in any living organism. It is anirreversible increase expressed in parameters such as size, area, length, height,
volume, cell number etc. It conspicuously involves increased protoplasmic material.
In plants, meristems are the sites of growth. Root and shoot apical meristems
sometimes alongwith intercalary meristem, contribute to the elongation growth ofknown that not only the duration of light period but that the duration of
dark period is also of equal importance. Hence, it can be said that flowering
in certain plants depends not only on a combination of light and dark
exposures but also their relative durations. This response of plants to
periods of day/night is termed photoperiodism. It is also interesting tonote that while shoot apices modify themselves into flowering apices prior
to flowering, they (i.e., shoot apices of plants) by themselves cannot percieve
photoperiods. The site of perception of light/dark duration are the leaves.
It has been hypothesised that there is a hormonal substance(s) that is
responsible for flowering. This hormonal substance migrates from leaves
to shoot apices for inducing flowering only when the plants are exposed
to the necessary inductive photoperiod.15.6VERNALISATIONThere are plants for which flowering is either quantitatively or qualitativelydependent on exposure to low temperature. This phenomenon is termed
vernalisation. It prevents precocious reproductive development late inthe growing season, and enables the plant to have sufficient time to reach
maturity. Vernalisation refers specially to the promotion of flowering by a
period of low temperature. Some important food plants, wheat, barley,
rye have two kinds of varieties: winter and spring varieties. The ‚spring™
variety are normally planted in the spring and come to flower and produce
grain before the end of the growing season. Winter varieties, however, if
planted in spring would normally fail to flower or produce mature grain
within a span of a flowering season. Hence, they are planted in autumn.
They germinate, and over winter come out as small seedlings, resume
growth in the spring, and are harvested usually around mid-summer.Another example of vernalisation is seen in biennial plants. Biennialsare monocarpic plants that normally flower and die in the second season.
Sugarbeet, cabbages, carrots are some of the common biennials.
Subjecting the growing of a biennial plant to a cold treatment stimulates
a subsequent photoperiodic flowering response.
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT253plant axes. Growth is indeterminate in higher plants. Following cell division in rootand shoot apical meristem cells, the growth could be arithmetic or geometrical.
Growth may not be and generally is not sustained at a high rate throughout the
life of cell/tissue/organ/organism. One can define three principle phases of growth
Œ the lag, the log and the senescent phase. When a cell loses the capacity to divide,
it leads to differentiation. Differentiation results in development of structures that
is commensurate with the function the cells finally has to perform. General principles
for differentiation for cell, tissues and organs are similar. A differentiated cell may
dedifferentiate and then redifferentiate. Since differentiation in plants is open, the
development could also be flexible, i.e., the development is the sum of growth and
differentiation. Plant exhibit plasticity in development.Plant growth and development are under the control of both intrinsic andextrinsic factors. Intercellular intrinsic factors are the chemical substances, called
plant growth regulators (PGR). There are diverse groups of PGRs in plants,
principally belonging to five groups: auxins, gibberellins, cytokinins, abscisic acid
and ethylene. These PGRs are synthesised in various parts of the plant; they control
different differentiation and developmental events. Any PGR has diverse
physiological effects on plants. Diverse PGRs also manifest similar effects. PGRs
may act synergistically or antagonistically. Plant growth and development is also
affected by light, temperature, nutrition, oxygen status, gravity and such external
factors.Flowering in some plants is induced only when exposed to certain duration ofphotoperiod. Depending on the nature of photoperiod requirements, the plants
are called short day plants, long day plants and day-neutral plants. Certain plants
also need to be exposed to low temperature so as to hasten flowering later in life.
This treatement is known as vernalisation.EXERCISES1.Define growth, differentiation, development, dedifferentiation, redifferentiation,
determinate growth, meristem and growth rate.2.Why is not any one parameter good enough to demonstrate growth throughout
the life of a flowering plant?3.Describe briefly:
(a) Arithmetic growth
(b) Geometric growth
(c) Sigmoid growth curve
(d) Absolute and relative growth rates4.List five main groups of natural plant growth regulators. Write a note on discovery,
physiological functions and agricultural/horticultural applications of any one
of them.
254BIOLOGY5.What do you understand by photoperiodism and vernalisation? Describe theirsignificance.6.Why is abscisic acid also known as stress hormone?7.‚Both growth and differentiation in higher plants are open™. Comment.8.‚Both a short day plant and a long day plant can produce can flower
simultaneously in a given place™. Explain.9.Which one of the plant growth regulators would you use if you are asked to:
(a) induce rooting in a twig
(b) quickly ripen a fruit
(c) delay leaf senescence
(d) induce growth in axillary buds
(e) ‚bolt™ a rosette plant
(f) induce immediate stomatal closure in leaves.10.Would a defoliated plant respond to photoperiodic cycle? Why?11.What would be expected to happen if:
(a) GA3 is applied to rice seedlings(b) dividing cells stop differentiating
(c) a rotten fruit gets mixed with unripe fruits
(d) you forget to add cytokinin to the culture medium.
