EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS IN BIOLOGY - CLASS XI
(Corrections in the questions)
Chapter 1
The Living World

Multiple Choice Questions

3. The term ‚systematics™ refer to:
a. Identification and study of organ systems

b. Identification and preservation of plants and animals

c. Diversity of kinds of organisms and their relationship

d. Study of habitats of organisms and their classification
Chapter 2

Biological Classification

Multiple Choice Questions

8. Associations between Mycobiont and Phycobiont are found in
Chapter 3
Plant Kingdom

Multiple Choice Questions

2. Fusion of two motile gametes which are dissimilar in size is termed as
Chapter 4
Animal Kingdom

Multiple Choice Questions

1.In some animal groups, the body is found divided into compartments with serial repetition of
at least some organs. This characteristic feature is called
2.Given below are types of cells present in some animals. Which of the following cells can
differentiate to perform different functions?
5.b. Pneumatic bones

d. Warm blooded
7.b. Asterias
 exhibits radial symmetry
13. Column Bi.Canal system

ii.Water-vascular system

iii.Muscular pharynx

iv.Jointed appendages

v.Metameres

Chapter 5Morphology of Flowering Plants

Multiple Choice Questions

6.a. CoconutChapter 6

Anatomy of Flowering Plants

Multiple Choice Questions

4.Identify the simple tissue from among the following -
14.In conifers, fibres are likely to be absent in

Chapter 7
Structural Organisation in Animals

Multiple Choice Questions
4.Delete the question
5.Setae help in locomotion in earthworm but are not uniformly present in all the segments. They
are present in
Chapter 8
Cell: The Unit of Life

Multiple Choice Questions

4.Which of the following stains is not used for staining chromosomes?
a.Basic Fuchsin

b.Safranin

c.Methylene green

d.Carmine
Ans:- b. Safranin
5.Options:
a.i, iv, iii, ii
b.i, iii, iv, ii

c.ii, i, iii, iv

d.iii, ii, i, iv
6.Which of the following features is common to prokaryotes and many eukaryotes?
a.Chromatin material present

b.Cell wall present

c.Nuclear membrane present

d.Membrane-bound sub-cellular organelles present
10.a.Cell wall is made up of peptidoglycans

12.c.Presence of thylakoids
Chapter 9Biomolecules

Multiple Choice Questions

3.Aminoacids have both an amino group and a carboxyl group in their structure. Which amongst
the following is an amino acid?

a.Formic acid

b.Glycerol

c.Glycolic acid

d.Glycine
4.An aminoacid under certain conditions have both positive and negative charges simultaneously
in the same molecule. Such a form of aminoacid is called

a.Acidic form

b.Basic form

c.Aromatic form

d.Zwitterionic form
5.Which os the following sugars have the same number of carbon as present in glucose?
6.An acid soluble compound formed by phosphorylation of nucleoside is called

9.A homopolymer has only one type of building block called monomer repeated ‚n™ number of
times. A heteropolymer has more than one type of monomer. Proteins are heteropolymers usually
made of

c.30 types of monomers
13.The primary structure of a protein molecule has
14.Which of the following reactions is not enzyme-mediated in biological system?

Chapter 10
Cell Cycle and Cell Division

Multiple Choice Questions

1.Meiosis in diploid organisms results in
5.d.Pairing of homologous chromosomes
Chapter 11
Transport in Plants

Multiple Choice Questions

7.a.accumulated

b.bound to cell wall

11.Options:a.A-ii, B-iv, C-v, D-i, E-iii

b.A-iii, B-ii, C-iv, D-i, E-v

c.A-i, B-ii, C-iii, D-ii, E-v

d.A-v, B-iv, C-iii, D-ii, E-i
12. Mark the mismatched pair.
a.Amyloplast:  store protein granule

b.Elaioplast:  store oils or fats

c.Chloroplasts:  contain chlorophyll pigments

d.Chromoplasts:  contain coloured pigments other than chlorophyll
Chapter 12

Mineral Nutrition

Multiple Choice Questions

2.b.essential element concentration below which plant growth becomes enhanced.
Chapter 13
Photosynthesis in Higher Plants
Multiple Choice Questions
4.Which light range is least effective in photosynthesis?
Chapter 14Respiration in Plants
Multiple Choice Questions
6.Delete the question
Chapter 15Plant Growth and Development
Multiple Choice Questions
2.Coconut water contains
8.b.Plant development is dependent on the environment
Chapter 16
Digestion and Absorption

Multiple Choice Questions

9.d.Secretion of hormone called gastrin
10.c.Enterokinase is secreted by pancreas

Chapter 17Breathing and Exchange of Gases
Multiple Choice Questions
1.Respiration in insects is called direct because
a.The cells exchange O
2/ CO2 directly with the air in the tubes2.Which of the following does not occur during breathing?
b.Brings the air to body temperature
4.d.It increases O
2 transport8.d.Diaphragm and intercostal muscles
13.From the following relationships between respiratory volume and capacities, mark the correct
optionChapter 18

Body Fluids and Circulation

Multiple Choice Questions

1.Which of the following cells does not exhibit phagocytic activity?
7.Which one of the following types of cells lack nucleus in humans?
d.Erythrocytes
10.Agranulocytes responsible for immune response of the body are

Chapter 19
Excretory Products and their Elimination

Multiple Choice Questions

3.Which of the following statements is correct?
6.a.D-i, C-ii, B-iii, A-iv
b.B-i, D-ii, A-iii, C-iv

c.D-i, C-ii, A-iii, B-iv

d.B-i, C-ii, A-iii, D-iv
Chapter 20

Locomotion and Movement

Multiple Choice Questions

7. Which one of the following pairs is incorrect?
a.Hinge joint:  between humerus and pectoral girdle

b.Pivot joint:  between atlas and axis

c.Gliding joint:  between the carpals

d.Saddle joint:  between carpals metacarpals of thumb

Chapter 22Chemical Coordination and Integration
Multiple Choice Questions
2.Which of the following hormones is not secreted by anterior pituitary?

5.c.Differentiation of T lymphocytes
11.Hormones are called chemical signals that stimulate specific target tissues. Which is the
correct location of these receptors in case of protein hormones?12.Choose the correct option among the following
Column AColumn B
A. Epinephrinei. 
Stimulates muscle growthB. Testosteroneii. Decrease in blood pressure

C. Glucagoniii. Breakdown of liver glycogen

D. Atrial natriuretic Factoriv. Increases heart beat
Options:a.A-ii, B-i, C-iii, C-iv

b.A-iv, B-i, C-iii, D-ii

c.A-i, B-ii, C-iii, D-iv

d.A-i, B-iv, C-ii, D-iii
13.Which of the following do not play any role in calcium balance in the human body?
14.Which of the following organs in mammals does not consist of a central ‚medullary™ region
surrounded by a cortical region?15.Which of the following conditions is not linked to deficiency fo thyroid hormone?
d.Exopthalmia
Chapter 23Answers to Multiple Choice Questions
(Corrections in the answers)Chapter 1: The Living World
8-bChapter 3: Plant Kingdom
1-cChapter 4: Animal Kingdom
4-b;7-c
Chapter 5: Morphology of Flowering Plants8-b
Chapter 6: Anatomy in Flowering Plants8-c;14-b;17-cChapter 8: Cell: The Unit of Life

1-d;4-b
Chapter 9: Biomolecules3-d;14-aChapter 10: Cell Cycle and Cell Division

2-b;5-b
Chapter 11: Transport in Plants
1-d;7-c
11-aChapter 12: Mineral Nutrition
2-b4-d;8-d
Chapter 13: Photosynthesis in Higher Plants4-dChapter 14: Respiration in Plants4-cChapter 17: Breathing and Exchange of Gases1-a;2-c;
4-b;6-c;7-a;8-c;14-a
Chapter 18: Body Fluid and Circulation

2-c;10-d;16-d
Chapter 19: Excretory Products and their Elimination
3-b;14-b;15-c
Chapter 20: Locomotion and Movement
4-cChapter 21: Neural Control and Co-ordination
11-dChapter 22: Chemical Coordination and Integration
14-c
