162BIOLOGYAre you aware that all organisms, even the largest, start their life from asingle cell? You may wonder how a single cell then goes on to form such
large organisms. Growth and reproduction are characteristics of cells,
indeed of all living organisms. All cells reproduce by dividing into two,
with each parental cell giving rise to two daughter cells each time they
divide. These newly formed daughter cells can themselves grow and divide,
giving rise to a new cell population that is formed by the growth and
division of a single parental cell and its progeny. In other words, such
cycles of growth and division allow a single cell to form a structure
consisting of millions of cells.10.1CELL CYCLECell division is a very important  process in all living organisms. Duringthe division of a cell, DNA replication and cell growth also take place. All
these processes, i.e., cell division, DNA replication, and cell growth, hence,
have to take place in a coordinated way to ensure correct division and
formation of progeny cells containing intact genomes. The sequence of
events by which a cell duplicates its genome, synthesises the other
constituents of the cell and eventually divides into two daughter cells is
termed cell cycle. Although cell growth (in terms of cytoplasmic increase)is a continuous process, DNA synthesis occurs only during one specific
stage in the cell cycle. The replicated chromosomes (DNA) are then
distributed to daughter nuclei by a complex series of events during cell
division. These events are themselves under genetic control.CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISIONCHAPTER  1010.1Cell Cycle10.2M Phase10.3Significance of
Mitosis10.4Meiosis10.5Significance ofMeiosis
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION16310.1.1Phases of Cell CycleA typical eukaryotic cell cycle is illustrated byhuman cells in culture. These cells divide oncein approximately every 24 hours (Figure 10.1).However, this duration of cell cycle can varyfrom organism to organism and also from celltype to cell type. Yeast for example, can progressthrough the cell cycle in only about 90 minutes.The cell cycle is divided into two basicphases:ll
ll
lInterphasell

ll
lM Phase (Mitosis phase)The M Phase represents the phase when theactual cell division or mitosis occurs and theinterphase represents the phase between twosuccessive M phases. It is significant to notethat in the 24 hour average duration of cellcycle of a human cell, cell division proper lastsfor only about an hour. The interphase lastsmore than 95% of the duration of cell cycle.The M Phase starts with the nuclear division, corresponding to theseparation of daughter chromosomes (karyokinesis) and usually endswith division of cytoplasm (cytokinesis). The interphase, though  calledthe resting phase,  is the time during which the cell is preparing for divisionby undergoing both cell growth and DNA replication in an orderly manner.The interphase is divided into three further phases:ll
ll
lG1 phase (Gap 1)ll

ll
lS phase  (Synthesis)ll

ll
lG2 phase (Gap 2) G1 phase corresponds to the interval between mitosis and initiationof DNA replication. During G1 phase the cell is metabolically active andcontinuously grows but does not replicate its DNA. S or synthesis  phasemarks the period during which DNA synthesis or replication takes place.During this time the amount of DNA per cell doubles.  If the initial amountof DNA is denoted as 2C then it increases to 4C. However, there is noincrease in the chromosome number; if the cell had diploid or 2n numberof chromosomes at G1, even after S phase the number of chromosomesremains the same, i.e., 2n.In animal cells, during the S phase, DNA replication begins in thenucleus, and the centriole duplicates in the cytoplasm. During the G2phase, proteins are synthesised in preparation for mitosis while cell growthcontinues.How do plants andanimals continue togrow all their lives?Do all cells in a plantdivide all the time?Do you think all cells
continue to divide inall plants andanimals? Can youtell the name and thelocation of tissues
having cells thatdivide all their life inhigher plants? Doanimals have similarmeristematic
tissues?Figure 10.1 A diagrammatic view of cell cycleindicating formation of two cellsfrom one cellM Phase
164BIOLOGYSome cells in the adult animals do not appear to exhibit division (e.g.,heart cells) and many other cells divide only occasionally, as needed toreplace cells that have been lost because of injury or cell death. These
cells that do not divide further exit G1 phase to enter an inactive stagecalled quiescent stage (G0) of the cell cycle. Cells in this stage remainmetabolically active but no longer proliferate unless called on to do so
depending on the requirement of the organism.In animals, mitotic cell division is only seen in the diploid somaticcells. Against this, the plants can show mitotic divisions in both haploid
and diploid cells. From your recollection of examples of alternation of
generations in plants (Chapter 3) identify plant species and stages at which
mitosis is seen in haploid cells.10.2M PHASEThis is the most dramatic period of the cell cycle, involving a majorreorganisation of virtually all components of the cell. Since the number of
chromosomes in the parent and progeny cells is the same, it is also called asequational division. Though for convenience mitosis has been dividedinto four stages of nuclear division, it is very essential to understand that cell
division is a progressive process and very clear-cut lines cannot be drawn
between various stages. Mitosis is divided into the following four stages:ll
ll
lProphasell

ll
lMetaphasell

ll
lAnaphasell

ll
lTelophase10.2.1ProphaseProphase which is the first stage of mitosis follows the S and G2 phases ofinterphase. In the S and G2 phases the new DNA molecules formed are notdistinct but intertwined. Prophase is marked by the initiation of condensationof chromosomal material. The chromosomal material becomes untangledduring the process of chromatin condensation (Figure 10.2 a). The centriole,which had undergone duplication during S phase of interphase, now beginsto move towards opposite poles of the cell. The completion of prophase canthus be marked by the following characteristic events:ll
ll
lChromosomal material condenses to form compact mitoticchromosomes. Chromosomes are seen to be composed of twochromatids attached together at the centromere.ll
ll
lInitiation of the assembly of mitotic spindle, the microtubules, theproteinaceous components of the cell cytoplasm help in theprocess.You have studiedmitosis in onion roottip cells.  It has 16
chromosomes ineach cell.  Can youtell how manychromosomes willthe cell have at G1phase, after S phase,and after M phase?Also, what will be theDNA content of thecells at G1, after Sand at G2, if thecontent after M
phase is 2C?
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION165Cells at the end of prophase, when viewed under themicroscope, do not show golgi complexes, endoplasmicreticulum, nucleolus and the nuclear envelope.10.2.2MetaphaseThe complete disintegration of the nuclear envelope marksthe start of the second phase of mitosis, hence the
chromosomes are spread through the cytoplasm of the cell.
By this stage, condensation of chromosomes is completed
and they can be observed clearly under the microscope. This
then, is the stage at which morphology of chromosomes ismost easily studied. At this stage, metaphase chromosome
is made up of two sister chromatids, which are held together
by the centromere (Figure 10.2 b). Small disc-shaped
structures at the surface of the centromeres are called
kinetochores. These structures serve as the sites of attachment
of spindle fibres (formed by the spindle fibres) to the
chromosomes that are moved into position at the centre of
the cell. Hence, the metaphase is characterised by all the
chromosomes coming to lie at the equator with one chromatid
of each chromosome connected by its kinetochore to spindle
fibres from one pole and its sister chromatid connected by
its kinetochore to spindle fibres from the opposite pole (Figure
10.2 b). The plane of alignment of the chromosomes at
metaphase is referred to as the metaphase plate.  The keyfeatures of metaphase are:ll
ll
lSpindle fibres attach to kinetochores ofchromosomes.ll
ll
lChromosomes are moved to spindle equator and getaligned along metaphase plate through spindle fibres
to both poles.10.2.3AnaphaseAt the onset of anaphase, each chromosome arranged at
the metaphase plate is split simultaneously and the two
daughter chromatids, now referred to as chromosomes of
the future daughter nuclei, begin their migration towards
the two opposite poles. As each chromosome moves away
from the equatorial plate, the centromere of each
chromosome is towards the pole and hence at the leading
edge, with the arms of the chromosome trailing behind
(Figure 10.2 c). Thus, anaphase stage is characterised byFigure 10.2 a and b : A diagrammaticview of stages in mitosis
166BIOLOGYthe following key events:ll
ll
lCentromeres split and chromatids separate.ll

ll
lChromatids move to opposite poles.10.2.4TelophaseAt the beginning of the final stage of mitosis, i.e., telophase,the chromosomes that have reached their respective poles
decondense and lose their individuality. The individual
chromosomes  can no longer be seen and chromatin material
tends to collect in a mass in the two poles (Figure 10.2 d).
This is the stage which shows the following key events:ll
ll
lChromosomes cluster at opposite spindle poles and theiridentity is lost as discrete elements.ll
ll
lNuclear envelope assembles around the chromosomeclusters.ll
ll
lNucleolus, golgi complex and ER reform.10.2.5CytokinesisMitosis accomplishes not only the segregation of duplicatedchromosomes into daughter nuclei (karyokinesis), but the
cell itself is divided into two daughter cells by a separate
process called cytokinesis at the end of which cell division is
complete (Figure 10.2 e). In an animal cell, this is achieved
by the appearance of a furrow in the plasma membrane.
The furrow gradually deepens and ultimately joins in the
centre dividing the cell cytoplasm into two. Plant cells
however, are enclosed by a relatively inextensible cell wall,
thererfore they undergo cytokinesis by a different
mechanism. In plant cells, wall formation starts in the centre
of the cell and grows outward to meet the existing lateral
walls. The formation of the new cell wall begins with the
formation of a simple precursor, called the cell-plate thatrepresents the middle lamella between the walls of two
adjacent cells. At the time of cytoplasmic division, organelles
like mitochondria and plastids get distributed between the
two daughter cells. In some organisms karyokinesis is not
followed by cytokinesis as a result of which multinucleate
condition arises leading to the formation of syncytium (e.g.,
liquid endosperm in coconut).Figure 10.2 c to e : A diagrammaticview of stages in Mitosis
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION16710.3Significance of MitosisMitosis or the equational division is usually restricted to the diploid cellsonly. However, in some lower plants and in some social insects haploid
cells also divide by mitosis. It is very essential to understand the
significance of this division in the life of an organism. Are you aware of
some examples where you have studied about haploid and diploid insects?Mitosis usually results in the production of diploid daughter cellswith identical genetic complement. The growth of multicellular organisms
is due to mitosis. Cell growth results in disturbing the ratio between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. It therefore becomes essential for the cell to
divide to restore the nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio. A very significant
contribution of mitosis is cell repair. The cells of the upper layer of the
epidermis, cells of the lining of the gut, and blood cells are being constantly
replaced. Mitotic divisions in the meristematic tissues Œ the apical and
the lateral cambium, result in a continuous growth of plants throughout
their life.10.4MEIOSISThe production of offspring by sexual reproduction includes the fusionof two gametes, each with a complete haploid set of chromosomes. Gametes
are formed from specialised diploid cells. This specialised kind of cell
division that reduces the chromosome number by half results in the
production of haploid daughter cells. This kind of division is called
meiosis. Meiosis ensures the production of haploid phase in the life cycleof sexually reproducing organisms whereas fertilisation restores the diploid
phase. We come across meiosis during gametogenesis in plants and
animals. This leads to the formation of haploid gametes. The key features
of meiosis are as follows:ll
ll
lMeiosis involves two sequential cycles of nuclear and cell division calledmeiosis I and meiosis II but only a single cycle of DNA replication.ll
ll
lMeiosis I is initiated after the parental chromosomes have replicatedto produce identical sister chromatids at the S phase.ll
ll
lMeiosis involves pairing of homologous chromosomes andrecombination between them.ll
ll
lFour haploid cells are formed at the end of meiosis II.Meiotic events can be grouped under the following phases:Meiosis IMeiosis IIProphase IProphase IIMetaphase IMetaphase IIAnaphase IAnaphase IITelophase ITelophase II
168BIOLOGY10.4.1Meiosis IProphase I: Prophase of the first meiotic division is typically longer andmore complex when compared to prophase of mitosis. It has been furthersubdivided into the following five phases based on chromosomal
behaviour, i.e., Leptotene, Zygotene, Pachytene, Diplotene and Diakinesis.During leptotene stage the chromosomes become gradually visibleunder the light microscope. The compaction of chromosomes continues
throughout leptotene. This is followed by the second stage of prophase
I called zygotene. During this stage chromosomes start pairing togetherand this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired
chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. Electron
micrographs of this stage indicate that chromosome synapsis is
accompanied by the formation of complex structure called
synaptonemal complex. The complex formed by a pair of synapsedhomologous chromosomes is called a bivalent or a tetrad. However,these are more clearly visible at the next stage. The first two stages of
prophase I are relatively short-lived compared to the next stage that is
pachytene. During this stage bivalent chromosomes now clearly appearsas tetrads. This stage is characterised by the appearance of
recombination nodules, the sites at which crossing over occurs between
non-sister chromatids of the homologous chromosomes. Crossing over
is the exchange of genetic material between two homologous
chromosomes. Crossing over is also an enzyme-mediated process and
the enzyme involved is called recombinase. Crossing over leads to
recombination of genetic material on the two chromosomes.
Recombination between homologous chromosomes is completed by
the end of pachytene, leaving the chromosomes linked at the sites of
crossing over.The beginning of diplotene is recognised by the dissolution of thesynaptonemal complex and the tendency of the recombined
homologous chromosomes of the bivalents to separate from each other
except at the sites of crossovers. These X-shaped structures, are called
chiasmata. In oocytes of some vertebrates, diplotene can last formonths or years.The final stage of meiotic prophase I is diakinesis. This is marked byterminalisation of chiasmata. During this phase the chromosomes are
fully condensed and the meiotic spindle is assembled to prepare the
homologous chromosomes for separation. By the end of diakinesis, the
nucleolus disappears and the nuclear envelope also breaks down.
Diakinesis represents transition to metaphase.
Metaphase I: The bivalent chromosomes align on the equatorial plate(Figure 10.3). The microtubules from the opposite poles of the spindle
attach to the pair of homologous chromosomes.
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION169Anaphase I: The homologous chromosomes separate, while sisterchromatids remain associated at their centromeres (Figure 10.3).Telophase I: The nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear, cytokinesisfollows and this is called as dyad of cells (Figure 10.3). Although in manycases the chromosomes do undergo some dispersion, they do not reachthe extremely extended state of the interphase nucleus. The stage betweenthe two meiotic divisions is called interkinesis and is generally short lived.Interkinesis is followed by prophase II, a much simpler prophase thanprophase I.10.4.2Meiosis IIProphase II: Meiosis II is initiated immediately after cytokinesis, usuallybefore the chromosomes have fully elongated.  In contrast to meiosis I,meiosis II resembles a normal mitosis. The nuclear membrane disappearsby the end of prophase II (Figure 10.4). The chromosomes again becomecompact.Metaphase II: At this stage the chromosomes align at the equator andthe microtubules from opposite poles of the spindle get attached to thekinetochores (Figure 10.4) of sister chromatids.Anaphase II: It begins with the simultaneous splitting of the centromereof each chromosome  (which was holding the sister chromatids together),allowing them to move toward opposite poles of the cell (Figure 10.4).Figure 10.3 Stages of Meiosis I
170BIOLOGYTelophase II: Meiosis ends with telophase II, in which the twogroups of chromosomes once again get enclosed by a nuclearenvelope; cytokinesis follows resulting in the formation of tetradof cells i.e., four haploid daughter cells (Figure 10.4).10.5SIGNIFICANCE OF MEIOSISMeiosis is the mechanism by which conservation of specificchromosome number of each species is achieved across
generations in sexually reproducing organisms, even though the
process, per se, paradoxically, results in reduction of chromosome
number by half. It also increases the genetic variability in the
population of organisms from one generation to the next. Variations
are very important for the process of evolution.Figure 10.4 Stages of Meiosis IISUMMARYAccording to the cell theory, cells arise from preexisting cells. The process by
which this occurs is called cell division. Any sexually reproducing organism
starts its life cycle from a single-celled zygote. Cell division does not stop with
the formation of the mature organism but continues throughout its life cycle.
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION171The stages through which a cell passes from one division to the next is calledthe cell cycle. Cell cycle is divided into two phases called (i) Interphase Œ aperiod of preparation for cell division, and (ii) Mitosis (M phase) Œ the actualperiod of cell division. Interphase is further subdivided into G1, S and G2. G1phase is the period when the cell grows and carries out normal metabolism.Most of the organelle duplication also occurs during this phase. S phase marks
the phase of DNA replication and chromosome duplication. G2 phase is theperiod of cytoplasmic growth. Mitosis is also divided into four stages namely
prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase. Chromosome condensation
occurs during prophase. Simultaneously, the centrioles move to the opposite
poles. The nuclear envelope and the nucleolus disappear and the spindle
fibres start appearing. Metaphase is marked by the alignment of chromosomes
at the equatorial plate. During anaphase the centromeres divide and the
chromatids start moving towards the two opposite poles. Once the chromatids
reach the two poles, the chromosomal elongation starts, nucleolus and the
nuclear membrane reappear. This stage is called the telophase.  Nuclear
division is then followed by the cytoplasmic division and is called cytokinesis.
Mitosis thus, is the equational division in which the chromosome number ofthe parent is conserved in the daughter cell.In contrast to mitosis, meiosis occurs in the diploid cells, which are destined toform gametes. It is called the reduction division since it reduces the chromosome
number by half while making the gametes. In sexual reproduction when the two
gametes fuse the chromosome number is restored to the value in the parent.
Meiosis is divided into two phases Œ meiosis I and meiosis II. In the first meiotic
division the homologous chromosomes pair to form bivalents, and undergo crossing
over. Meiosis I has a long prophase, which is divided further into five phases.
These are leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During
metaphase I the bivalents arrange on the equatorial plate. This is followed by
anaphase I in which homologous chromosomes move to the opposite poles with
both their chromatids. Each pole receives half the chromosome number of the
parent cell. In telophase I, the nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear. Meiosis
II is similar to mitosis. During anaphase II the sister chromatids separate. Thus at
the end of meiosis four haploid cells are formed.EXERCISES1.What is the average cell cycle span for a mammalian cell?2.Distinguish cytokinesis from karyokinesis.3.Describe the events taking place during interphase.4.What is Go (quiescent phase) of cell cycle?
172BIOLOGY5.Why is mitosis called equational division?6.Name the stage of cell cycle at which one of the following events occur:(i)Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator.(ii)Centromere splits and chromatids separate.(iii)Pairing between homologous chromosomes takes place.(iv)Crossing over between homologous chromosomes takes place.7.Describe the following:(a) synapsis  (b) bivalent  (c) chiasmata
Draw a diagram to illustrate your answer.8.How does cytokinesis in plant cells differ from that in animal cells?9.Find examples where the four daughter cells from meiosis are equal in size andwhere they are found unequal in size.10.Distinguish anaphase of mitosis from anaphase I of meiosis.11.List the main differences between mitosis and meiosis.12.What is the significance of meiosis?13.Discuss with your teacher about(i)haploid insects and lower plants where cell-division occurs, and(ii)some haploid cells in higher plants where cell-division does not occur.14.Can there be mitosis without DNA replication in ‚S™ phase?15.Can there be DNA replication without cell division?16.Analyse the events during every stage of cell cycle and notice how the following
two parameters change(i)number of chromosomes (N) per cell(ii)amount of DNA content (C) per cell
