PART
 IFoundations of Business
CHAPTER 1NATURE
 AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESSLEARNING OBJECTIVESAfter studying this chapter, you should be able to:
•explain the concept and characteristics of business;•compare the distinctive features of business, profession andemployment;•classify business activities and clarify the meaning of industry and
commerce;•state various types of industry;•explain the activities relating to commerce;•analyse the objectives of business;•describe the nature of business risks and their causes; and•discuss the basic factors to be considered while starting a business.
3NATURE AND PURPOSE OF BUSINESSthat we understand the concept, natureand purpose of business.1.2C
ONCEPT OF BUSINESSThe term business is derived from the
word ‚busy™. Thus, business meansbeing busy. However, in a specific
sense, business refers to an occupationin which people regularly engage inactivities related to purchase,production and/or sale of goods andservices with a view to earning profits.The activity may consist of productionor purchase of goods for sale, orexchange of goods or supply of servicesto satisfy the needs of other people.In every society people undertakevarious activities to satisfy their needs.These activities may be broadlyclassified into two groupsŠeconomic
and non-economic. Economic activitiesare those by which we can earn ourlivelihood whereas non-economicactivities are those performed out oflove, sympathy, sentiments, patriotism,etc. For example, a worker working in1.1I
NTRODUCTIONThe conversation among the fourclassmates is obviously focused on themeaning, nature and purpose ofbusiness. All human beings, whereverthey may be, require different types ofgoods and services to satisfy their needs.The necessity of supplying goods andservices has led to certain activities beingundertaken by people to produce andsell what is needed by others. Businessis a major economic activity in allmodern societies concerned as it is withthe production and sale of goods andservices required by people. Thepurpose behind most business activitiesis to earn money by meeting people™sdemands for goods and services.Business is central to our lives. Althoughour lives are influenced by many otherinstitutions in modern society such asschools, colleges, hospitals, politicalparties and religious bodies, businesshas the major influence on our dailylives. It, therefore, becomes importantImran, Manpreet, Joseph and Priyanka have been classmates in Class X. Aftertheir exams are over, they happen to meet at a common friend Ruchika™s house.
Just when they are sharing their experiences of examination days, Ruchika™sfather, Mr. Raghuraj Chaudhury intervenes and asks about their well-being. He
also enquires from each one of them about their career plans. But none of themhas a definite reply. Mr. Raghuraj, who himself is a businessman, suggests to

them that they can opt for business as a promising and challenging career.
Joseph gets excited by the idea and says, ﬁYes, business is really good for making
lots of money even more than is possible by becoming an engineer or a doctor.ﬂ

Mr. Raghuraj opines, ﬁLet me tell you, young man, there is a lot more to business
than merely moneyﬂ. He then gets busy with some other guests. However, the
four classmates begin raising many questions: What exactly business is all about?
What else is there in business besides money? How is business different fromnon-business activities? What does one require to start a business? And, so on.
