CHAPTER 4BUSINESS SERVICES
LEARNING OBJECTIVESAfter studying this chapter, you should be able to:•state the characteristics of services;•distinguish services from goods;•classify different types of business services;•explain the concept of e-banking;•identify and classify different types of insurance policies; and•describe different types of warehouses.
78BUSINESSSTUDIES
4.1I
NTRODUCTIONYou must all have, at some time or the
other experienced the effect of businessactivities on your lives. Let us examinefew examples of business activity i.e.,

purchasing ice cream from a store andeating ice cream in a restaurant,watching a movie in a cinema hall orpurchasing a video cassette/CD,purchasing a school bus and leasing it
from a transporter. If you analyse all
these activities, you will observe thatthere is a difference between purchasingand eating, purchasing and watchingand purchasing and leasing. What is
common in all of them is that one ispurchasing an item and the other isexperiencing a service. But there isdefinitely a difference between the item
or good and the service performed.For a layperson, services areessentially intangibles. Their purchasedoes not result in the ownership ofanything physical. For example, you can
only seek advice from the doctor, you
cannot purchase him. Services are allthose economic activities that areintangible and imply an interaction tobe realised between the service provider
and the consumer.
Services are those separatelyidentifiable, essentially intangibleactivities that provides satisfaction ofwants, and are not necessarily linked to
the sale of a product or another service.All of us have seen a petrol pump. Have your ever thought how a petrol pumpowner does his business in a village? How he gets the petrol and diesel to the
villages in the interior? How he gets the money to purch
ase large quantities ofpetrol and diesel? How he communicates to petrol depots for requirement andalso to customers? How he safeguards himself from various risks associatedwith this business? The answer to all the above questions lies in the
understanding of business services. The transportation of petrol and dieselfrom oil refineries to petrol pumps is carried out by train and tankers (transportservices).  They are then stored at various depots of oil companies situated in
all major towns across India (warehousing services). Petrol pump owners use
postal, mail and telephone facilities to be in touch with customers, banks and
the depots for the availability of their requirements on regular basis(communication services). As oil companies always sell the petrol and dieselon advance payment, the owners have to take loans and advances from banksto fund their purchases (banking services). Petrol and diesel being highly risky

products, the owners have to safeguard themselves from various risks by getting
the business, the products, the life of people working there, etc., insure
(insurance services). Thus, we see that a single business of providing petrol
and diesel at a petrol pump is actually a collective outcome of various business
services. These services are being utilised in the entire process of shipment of
petrol and diesel from oil refineries to the point of sale at petrol pumps, spread
across the length and breath of India.
79BUSINESS SERVICESA good is a physical product
capable of being delivered to apurchaser and involves the transfer of
ownership from 
seller to customer.
Goods are also generally used to refer
to commodities or items of all types,
except services, involved in trade orcommerce.4.2N
ATURE OF SERVICESThere are five basic features of services.These features also distinguish themfrom goods and are known as the fiveIs
of services. These are discussed as
below:(i)Intangibility:
 Services areintangible, i.e., they cannot be touched.They are experiential in nature. Onecannot taste a doctor™s treatment, ortouch entertainment. One can only
experience it. An important implication
of this is that quality of the offer canoften not be determined beforeconsumption and, therefore, purchase.
It is, therefore, important for the serviceproviders that they consciously workon creating a desired service so that the
customer undergoes a favourable
experience. For example,
 treatment bya
doctor should be a favourable experience.

(ii)Inconsistency:
 The secondimportant characteristic of services isinconsistency. Since there is nostandard tangible product, services
have to be performed exclusively eachtime. Different customers have differentdemands and expectations. Serviceproviders need to have an opportunity
to alter their offer to closely meet therequirements of the customers. This ishappening, for example, in the case of
mobile services.(iii)Inseparability:
 Anotherimportant characteristic of services isthe simultaneous activity of productionand consumption being performed.
This makes the production and
consumption of services seem to be
inseparable. While we can manufacturea car today and sell it after, say, a
month; this is often not possible with
services that have to be consumed asand when they are produced. Serviceproviders may design a substitute forthe person by using appropriatetechnology but the interaction with the
customer remains a key feature ofservices. Automated Teller Machines
(ATMs) may replace the banking clerkfor the front office activities like cashwithdrawal and cheque deposit. But,
at the same time, the presence of the
customer, is required and his/her

interaction with the process has to bemanaged.(iv)Inventory (Less):
 Services have
little or no tangible components and,therefore, cannot be stored for a futureuse. That is, services are perishable
and providers can, at best, store some
associated goods but not the service
itself. This means that the demand andsupply needs to be managed as theservice has to be performed as and
when the customer asks for it. They
cannot be performed earlier to be
consumed at a later date. For example,a railway ticket can be stored but therailway journey will be experienced
only when the r
ailways 
provides it.

80BUSINESSSTUDIES
(v)Involve
ment: One of the mostimportant characteristics of services isthe participation of the customer in the
service delivery process. A customer
has the opportunity to get the services
modified according to specificrequirements.4.2.1Difference between Services
and GoodsFrom the above, it is clear that the twomain differentiating characteristics of
services and goods are non-transferability of ownership andpresence of both provider as well asconsumer. While 
goods are 
produced,
services are performed. A service is an
act which cannot be taken home. What
we can take home is the effect of theservices. And as the services are soldat the consumption point, there are no
inventories. On the basis of abovefeatures, we can have followingpoints of distinction between goodsand services.4.3T
YPES OF SERVICESWhen speaking of the service sector,
services can be classified into threebroad categories, viz., businessservices, social services and personalservices. These have been explained inthe following pages.(i)Business Services:
 Businessservices are those services which areused by business enterprises for theconduct of their activities. Forexample, banki
ng, insurance,
transportation, warehousing  and
communication services.
sisaBsecivreSsdooGerutaN,.g.e.ssecorproytivitcanAllahamenicanieivomagnihctaw,.g.e.tcejbolacisyhpAeivomfoettessacoedivepyTsuoenegoreteHsuonegomoHytilibignatnItnemtaertrotcod,.g.eelbignatnIenicidem,.g.eelbignaTycnetsisnocnItnereffidgnivahsremotsuctnereffiDsecivreselibom,.g.esdnamedgnittegsremotsuctnereffiD.delliflufsdnameddesidradnatssenohpelibom,.g.eytilibarapesnIdnanoitcudorpsuoenatlumiSgnitae,.g.e.noitpmusnoctnaruatseranimaerc-ecidnanoitcudorpfonoitarapeSgnisahcrup,.g.e.noitpmusnocerotsamorfmaerceciyrotnevnI,.g.e.kcotsnitpekebtonnaCyenruojniartafoecneirepxeniart,.g.e.kcotsnitpekebnaCtekcityenruojtnemevlovnIehttasremotsucfonoitapicitraP,.g.e.yreviledecivresfoemittniojdooftsafaniecivres-flesfoemitehttatnemevlovnI,.g.e.elbissoptonyreviledelcihevagnirutcafunamDifference between Services and Goods
81BUSINESS SERVICESAn Introduction to the GATS
The agreement on trade in services reached in the Uruguay Round is perhapsthe most important single development in the multilateral trading system. Thenew General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) for the first time framedinternationally agreed rules and commitments, broadly comparable with those
of the General Agreement on Tarrif and Trade (GATT). The most important elementof GATS is the classification of services used in making commitments. The GATSschedule largely follows a classification, which identifies 11 basic service sectors(plus a twelfth category for miscellaneous services). These sectors are subdividedinto some 160 subsectors or separate service activities. As an example, the
tourism category breaks down into subsectors for hotel and restaurants.The twelve sectors are:1.Business services (including professional and computer)
2.Communication services
3.Construction and related engineering services

4.Distribution services
5.Educational services
6.Environmental services
7.Financial services (Insurance and Banking)
8.Health related and social services
9.Tourism and travel related services
10.Recreational, cultural and sporting services

11.Transport services and
12.Other services not included elsewhere
(ii)Social Services:
 Social servicesare those services t
hat are generally
provided voluntarily in pursuit ofcertain social goals. These social goals
may be to improve the standard of
living for weaker sections of society, to
provide educational services to theirchildren, or to provide health care and
hygienic conditions in slum areas.
These services are usually provided
voluntarily but for some consideration
to cover their costs. For example,health care and education services
provided by certain Non-governmentorganisations (NGOs) and government
agencies.(iii)Personal Services:
 Personalservices are those services which areexperienced differently by differentcustomers. These services cannot be
consistent in nature. They will differ
depending upon the service provider.

They will also depend uponcustomer™s preferences and demands.

For example, tourism, recreational
services, restaurants.In the context of betterunderstanding of the businessworld, we will be limiting ourfurther discussions to the first
category of the service sector i.e.,business services.

82BUSINESSSTUDIES
4.3.1Business ServicesToday™s world is of tough competition,
where the survival of the fittest is the
rule. There is no room for non-
performance, and hence companies
tend to stick to what they can do best.
In order to be competitive, business
enterprises, are becoming more andmore dependant on specialised
business services. Business enterprises
look towards banks for availability of

funds; insurance companies for getting

their plant, machinery, goods, etc.,
insured; transport companies fortransporting raw material; and finishedgoods, and telecom and 
postal servicesfor being in touch with their vendors,suppliers and customers. Today™sglobalised world has ushered in a rapidchange in the service industry in India.India has been gaining a highlycompetitive edge over other countries
when it comes to providing services tothe developed economies of the world.Many foreign companies are looking toIndia for performing a host of businessservices. They are even transferring a
part of their business operations to beperformed in India. We will discuss
these in detail in the next chapter.
Role of Services in an Economy†The services sectorŠincluding power, telecom and transport account for
60-65 per cent of the economy in most OECD (Organisation for EconomicCooperation and Development) countries. While that may be surprising, evendeveloping countries have significant proportion of their GDP coming fromthe services sector.
†Sustained, high and broad-based growth is essential for economic development
and poverty alleviation. What is needed for such growth is an increase in
investment in the economy. There are encouraging signs on both the growthand investment fronts in recent years. India is the second largest country inthe world, measured by a population of purchasing power parity. It ranksamong the top 5 economies of the world and expects to become the third largesteconomy in the world by 2025.†As with any growing economy the sectoral composition of GDP has been
changing with the services showing an increased share of above 50 per centand that of agriculture declining to 25 per cent. The services sector continuedto be the mainstay of the expansion during 2003-04, contributing 57.6 percent to real GDP growth. Leading the upsurge was ‚trade, hotels, transport
and communication™. This was in consonance with the improved performanceof the commodity producing sectors. The strong expansion in cargo handledat major ports as well as the rise in freight and passenger traffic of the railwaysboosted the performance of the transport sector.
†According to the latest estimates, services account for about 63 per cent of
the world economy. Industry accounts for 32 per cent and agriculture just 5
per cent. Nearly 70 per cent of the labour force in developed economies isemployed in the services sector.

83BUSINESS SERVICES4.4B
ANKINGCommercial banks are an importantinstitution of the economy for providinginstitutional credit to its customers. Abanking company in India is the onewhich transacts the business ofbanking which means accepting, for the
purpose of lending and investment ofdeposits of money from the public,repayable on demand or otherwise andwithdrawable by cheques, draft, orderor otherwise. In simple terms, a bank
accepts money on deposits, repayableon demand and also earns a margin ofprofit by lending money. A bank
stimulates economic activity in themarket by dealing in money. It mobilises
the savings of people 
and makes fundsavailable to business financing their
capital and revenue expenditure. Italso deals in financial instruments andprovides financial services for a pricei.e., interest, discount, commission, etc.
Banks can be classified into the
following:1.Commercial banks
2.Cooperative banks
3.Specialised banks
4.Central bank
(i)Commercial Banks: 
Commercialbanks are institutions dealing inmoney. These are governed by IndianBanking Regulation Act 1949 andaccording to it banking meansaccepting deposits of money from the
public for the purpose of lending orinvestment. There are two types ofcommercial banks, public sector andprivate sector banks.Public sectors banks are those inwhich the government has a majorstake and they usually need toemphasise on social objectives than onprofitability. Private sector banks areowned, managed and controlled byprivate promoters and they are free4.4.1Type of Banks
The focus of banking is varied, the
needs diverse and methods different.Thus, we need distinctive kinds of
banks to cater to the above-mentioned
complexities.to operate as per market forces. There

are 20 nationalised public sector banks
like SBI, PNB, IOB etc., and other
private sector banks represented by
HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Kotak
Mahindra Bank and Jammu and
Kashmir 
Bank.Banking and Social ObjectivesIn the recent past there has been a concerted effort by the policy makers inreorienting banking towards achieving social objectives. There has been a majorshift in the banking policy of the country:fromto
(i)Urban orientationŠRural orientation
(ii)Class bankingŠMass banking
(iii)Trad
itionalŠInn
ovative practices(iv)Short term objectivesŠDevelopment objectives

84BUSINESSSTUDIES
(ii)Cooperative Banks: 
CooperativeBanks are governed by the provisionsof State Cooperative Societies Act andmeant essentially for providing cheapcredit to their members. It is animportant source of rural credit i.e.,

agricultural financing in India.(iii)Specialised Banks: Specialisedbanks are foreign exchange banks,industrial banks, development banks,export-import banks catering to
specific needs of these unique activities.These banks provide financial aid toindustries, heavy  turnkey projects andforeign trade.(iv)Central Bank:
 The Central bankof any country supervises, controls andregulates the activities of all thecommercial banks of that country. Italso acts as a government  banker. It
controls and coordinates currency and
credit policies of any country. TheReserve Bank of India is the centralbank of our country.4.4.2Functions of Commercial
BanksBanks perform a variety of functions.Some of them are the basic or primaryfunctions of a bank while others areagency or general utility services innature. The important functions arebriefly discussed below:(i)Acceptance of deposits:
 Depositsare the basis of the loan operations
since banks are both borrowers andlenders of money. As borrowers theypay interest and as lenders they grant

loans and get interest. These depositsare generally taken through currentaccount, savings account and fixeddeposits. Current account deposits canbe withdrawn to the extent of the

balance at any time without any priornotice.Savings accounts are forencouraging savings by individuals.Banks pay rate of interest as decidedby RBI on these deposits. Withdrawalfrom these accounts has somerestrictions in relation to the amountas well as number of times in a givenperiod. Fixed accounts are timedeposits with higher rate of interest ascompared to the savings accounts. Apremature withdrawal is permissible
with a percentage of interest being
forfeited.(ii)Lending of funds: Second majoractivity of commercial banks is toprovide loans and advances out of themoney received through deposits.These advances can be made in the formof overdrafts, cash credits, discounting
trade bills, term loans, consumercredits and other miscellaneousadvances. The funds lent out by banks
contribute a great deal to trade,industry, transport and other businessactivities.
(iii)Cheque facility: Banks render avery important service to their
customers by collecting their cheques
drawn on other banks. The cheque is
the most developed credit instrument,a unique feature and function of banksfor the withdrawal of deposits. It is the
most convenient and an inexpensivemedium of exchange. There are twotypes of cheques mainly (a) bearer
cheques, which are encashableimmediately at bank counters and
85BUSINESS SERVICES(b) crossed cheques which are to bedeposited only in the payees account.
(iv)Remittance of funds:
 Anothersalient function of commercial banksis of providing the facility of fundtransfer from one place 
to another, on
account of the interconnectivity of
branches. The transfer of funds isadministered by using bank drafts, payorders or mail transfers, on nominal
commission charges. The bank issuesa draft for the amount on its ownbranches at other places or other banksat those places. The payee can presentthe draft on the drawee bank at his
place and collect the amount.(v)Allied services:
 In addition toabove functions, banks also provide
allied services such as bill payments,locker facilities, underwriting services.
They also perform other services like buying
and selling of shares and debentureson instructions and other personalservices like payment of insurancepremium, collection of dividend etc.4.4.3e-Banking
The growth of Internet and e-commerceis dramatically changing everydaylife, with the world wide web ande-commerce transforming the worldinto a digital global village. The latest
wave in information technology isinternet banking. It is a part of virtualbanking and another delivery channelfor customers.In simple terms, internet bankingmeans any user with a PC and abrowser can get connected to the bankswebsite to perform any of the virtualbanking functions and avail of any ofthe bank™s services. There is no humanoperator to respond to the needs of the
customer. The bank has a centraliseddata base that is web-enabled. All theservices that the bank has permittedon the internet are displayed on amenu. Any service can be selected and
further interaction is dictated by thenature of service.In this new digital market placebanks and financial institutions havestarted providing services over the
internet. These type of services providedby the banks on the internet, callede-banking, lowers the transaction cost,adds value to the banking relationshipand empowers customers. e-banking
is electronic banking or banking usingelectronic media. Thus, e-banking is aservice provided by many banks, thatallows, a customer to conduct bankingtransactions, such as managing
savings, checking accounts, applyingfor loans or paying bills over theinternet using a personal computer,
mobile telephone or handheldcomputer (personal digital assistant)
The range of services offered bye-banking are: Electronic FundsTransfer (EFT), Automated Teller
Machines (ATM) and Point of Sales(PoS), Electronic Data Interchange
(EDI) and Credit Cards Electronic orDigital cash.BenefitsThere are various benefits of e-bankingprovided to customers which are:(i)e-banking provides 24 hours,
365 days a year services to thecustomers of the bank;
86BUSINESSSTUDIES
(ii)Customers can make some of thepermitted transactions from officeor house or while travelling  via
mobile telephone;(iii)It 
inculcates a sense of financialdiscipline by recording each and
every transaction;(iv)Greater customer satisfaction byoffering unlimited access to the
bank, not limited by the walls of the
branch and less risk and greatersecurity to the customer as theycan avoid travelling with cash.
The banks also stand to gain bye-banking. The benefits are:(i)e-banking provides competitive
advantage to the bank;(ii)e-banking provides unlimitednetwork to the bank and is notlimited to the number of branches,Any PC connected to a modem anda telephone having an internetconnection can provide cashwithdrawl needs of the customer;(iii)Load on branches can beconsiderably reduced byestablishing centralised data base
and by taking over some of theaccounting functions.4.5I
NSURANCELife is full of uncertainties. The chancesof occurrence of an event causing losses
are quite uncertain. There are risks of
Indian Insurance SectorIt is a well-known fact that the Indian economy has been amongst the fastestgrowing economies of the world. It is triggered by better performances of all thethree sectors i.e., agriculture, industry and services. With an increase in
manufacturing and service sector activities, a directly proportional higherinsurance penetration is the need of the hour.
With the initiation of financial sector reforms, the Indian insurance sector whichwas till now under the government control has to set open for competition tomeet the global challenge. The first step taken by the government was to establishIRDA Act with the objective of streamlining the development process. The Indian
insurance market is a mega market with a huge potential. Since the opening of
the insurance sector in December 1999 the insurance industry is changingrapidly. Today 13 companies operate in the life and 13 in non-life segment. LICof India has dominated the life segment for over four decades although only
25 per cent of the insurable population was insured.From the year 2000 onwards IRDA started granting licenses to private players.Thus general insurance sector has seen considerable expansion over the past
few years. The premium income has recorded a growth rate of 20 per cent. Adepartment wise split shows that in the year 2002-03, 21 per cent of business isderived from fire, 9 per cent from marine insurance, 39 per cent from motor
insurance, 8 per cent from health schemes, 5 per cent from re-engineering and
remaining 18 per cent from other miscellaneous insurances. Amongst the fastestgrowing companies are the National Insurance, Bajaj Allianz, Tata-AIG and ICICILombard. Currently, over 70 per cent of the business underwritten (fire, marine,
motor and engineering) is subject to tariff controls.
87BUSINESS SERVICESdeath and disability for human life; fire
and burglary risk for property; perils of
the sea for shipment of goods and, so
on. If any of these takes place, the
individuals and/or, or
ganisations maysuffer a great loss, sometimes beyond

their capacities to bear the same. It
is to minimise the impact of suchuncertainties that there is a need for
insurance. Investment in factory
buildings or heavy equipments or other
assets is not possible unless there is
arrangement for covering the risks, with
the help of insurance. Keeping this in
mind, people facing common risks come
together and make small contributions
to a common fund, which helps to
spread the loss caused to an individualby a particular risk over a number ofpersons who are exposed to it.Insurance is thus a device by whichthe loss likely to be caused by anuncertain event is spread over anumber of persons who are exposed to
it and who prepare to insure themselves
against such an event. It is a contractor agreement under which one party
agrees in return for a consideration to
pay an agreed amount of money to
another party to make a loss, damage
or injury to something of value in
which the insured has a pecuniaryinterest as a result of some uncertainevent. The agreement/contract is put
in writing and is known as ‚policy™. The
person whose risk is insured is called
‚insured™ and the firm which insures the
risk of loss is known as insurer/
assurance underwriter.
4.5.1Fundamental principle ofInsurance
The basic principle of insurance is thatan individual or a business concern
chooses to spend a definitely known
sum in place of a possible huge amountinvolved in an indefinite future loss.
Thus insurance is the substitution of
a small periodic payment (premium) for
a risk of large possible loss. The loss of
risk still remains but the loss is spread
over a large number of policyholders
exposed to the same risk. The premium
paid by them are pooled out of which
the loss sustained by any policy holder
is compensated. Thus, risks are shared
with others. From the analysis of past
events the insurer (an insurance
company or an underwriter) knows the
probable losses caused by each type
of risk covered by insurance.Insurance, therefore, is a form of riskmanagement primarily used to safe
guard against the risk of potential
financial loss. Ideally, insurance is
defined as the equitable transfer of the risk

of a potential loss, from one entity to
another, in 
exchange for a reasonable
fee. Insurance company, therefore, is
an association, corporation or an
organisation engaged in the businessof paying all leg
itimate claims that mayarise, in exchange for a fee (known as
premium).Insurance is a social device in whicha group of individuals (insured)
transfers risk to another party (insurer)
in order to combine loss experience, which

provides for payment of losses from
88BUSINESSSTUDIES
funds contributed (premium) byall
members. Insurance is meant to protect

the insured, against uncertain events,which may cause disadvantage to him.4.5.2Functions of Insurance
The various functions of insurance areas follows:(i)Providing certainty:
 Insuranceprovides certainity of payment for the
risk of loss. There are uncertainties of
happenings of time and amount of loss.Insurance removes these uncertaintiesand the assured receives payment ofloss. The insurer charges premium forproviding the certainity.
(ii)Protection:
 The second mainfunction of insurance is to provide

protection from probable chances ofloss. Insurance cannot stop thehappening of a risk or event but can

compensate for losses arising out of it.(iii)Risk sharing:
 On the happeningof a risk event, the loss is shared by all
the persons exposed to it. The share isobtained from every insured member
by way of premiums.(iv)Assist in capital formation:
 Theaccumulated funds of the insurer
received by way of premium paymentsmade by the insured are invested in
various income generating schemes.4.5.3Principles of Insurance
The principles of insurance are therules of action or conduct adopted by
the stakeholders involved in theinsurance business. The specificprinciples of utmost significance to avalid insurance contract consists of the
following:(i)Utmost good faith: 
A contract ofinsurance is a contract of uberrimaefidei i.e., a contract found on utmostgood faith. Both the insurer and theinsured should display good faith
towards each other in regard to the
contract. It is the duty of the insured
to voluntarily make full, accuratedisclosure of all facts, material to therisk being proposed and the insurer to
make clear all the terms and conditions
in the insurance contract. Thus, it is
binding on the proposer to disclose all
material facts about the subject matter
of the proposed insurance. Any fact,
which is likely to affect the mind of  a
prudent insurer in deciding to accept
the proposal of insurance or in fixingthe rate of premium is material for thispurpose. Failure to make disclosure of
material facts by the insured makes the
contract of insurance voidable at the
discretion of the insurer.
Examples of facts to be disclosedFire insurance: Construction of building, fire detection and fire fightingequipment; nature of its use.Motor insurance: Type of vehicle; driver details.Personal Accident insurance: Age, height, weight, occupation, previous medicalhistory.Life insurance: Age, previous medical history, smoking/drinking habits.
89BUSINESS SERVICES(ii)Insurable Interest: The insured
must have an insurable interest in thesubject matter of insurance. Onefundamental fact of this principle isthat ‚it is not the house, ship,machinery, potential liability of life that
is insured, but it is the pecuniaryinterest of the insured in them, whichis insured.™ Insurable interest meanssome pecuniary interest in the subjectmatter of the insurance contract. Theinsured must have an interest in the
preservation of the thing or life insured,
so that he/she will suffer financially onthe happening of the event againstwhich he/she is insured. In case of
insurance of property, insurableinterest of the insured in the subjectmatter of the insurance must exist at
the time of happening of the event. Inorder to name insurable interesthowever, it is not necessary that one
should be the owner of the property.
For example, a trustee holdingproperty on behalf of others has aninsurable interest in the property.
(iii)Indemnity:
 All insurancecontracts of fire or marine insuranceare contracts of indemnity. According
to it, the insurer undertakes to put theinsured, in the event of loss, in the sameposition that he occupied immediately
before the happening of the event
insured against. In other words theinsurer undertakes to compensate theinsured for the loss caused to him/her
due to damage or destruction ofproperty insured. The compensationpayable and the loss suffered are to be
measured in terms of money. Theprinciple of indemnity is not applicableto life insurance.(iv)Proximate 
Cause: According tothis principle, an insurance policy isdesigned to provide compensation only
for such losses as are caused by the
perils which are stated in the policy.
When the loss is the result of two or
more causes, the proximate causemeans the direct, the most dominantand most effective cause of which the
loss is the natural consequence. In case
of loss arising out of any mishap, the
most proximate cause of the mishap
should be taken into consideration.
(v)Subrogation:
 It refers to the rightof the insurer to stand in the place of
the insured, after settlement of a claim,
as far as the right of insured in respect
of recovery from an alternative source
is involved. After the insured is
compensated for the loss or damage to
the property insured by him/her the
right of ownership of such property
passes on to the insurer. This is

because the insured should not be
allowed to make any profit, by selling
the damaged property or in the case of
lost property being recovered.
(vi)Con
tribution: As per this principleit is the right of an insurer who has paidclaim under an insurance, to call upon
other liable insurers to contribute for
the loss of payment. It implies, that in
case of double insurance, the insurers
are to share the losses in proportion to
the amount assured by each of them.
In case there is a loss, when there is
more than one policy on the same
property, the insured will have no right
to recover more than the full amount
of his actual loss. If the full amount is
recovered from one insurer the right toobtain further payment from the other
insurer will cease.
90BUSINESSSTUDIES
(vii)Mi
tigation: This principle states
that it is the duty of the insured to takereasonable steps to minimise the lossor damage to the insured property.Suppose goods kept in a store housecatch fire then the owner of the goodsshould try to recover the goods andsave them from fire to minimise theloss or damage. The insured mustbehave  with great prudence and notbe careless just because there is aninsurance cover. If r
easonable care is
not taken like any prudent person
then the claim from the insurancecompany may be lost.4.5.4Types of Insurance
Various types of insurance exist by
virtue of practice of insurance
companies and the influence of legal
enactments controlling the insurancebusiness. Broadly speaking, insurancemay be classified as follows:

91BUSINESS SERVICESLIFE INSURANCE
Since life itself is uncertain, allindividuals try to assure themselves of
a certain sum of money in the future totake care of unforeseen events orhappenings. Individuals in the courseof their life are always exposed to some
kind of risks.The risk may be of an event whichis certain that is death. In that case,what will happen to the other membersof the family who are dependent on aparticular individuals income. The
other risk may be living too long in
which an individual may become tooold to earn i.e., retirement. In this casealso, the earnings will decline or end.
Under such circumstances, individualsseek protection against these risksand life insurance companies offer
protection against such risks.A life insurance policy wasintroduced as a protection against the
uncertainity of life. But gradually its
scope has widened and there arevarious types of insurance policiesavailable to suit the requirements of an
individual. For example, disabilityinsurance, health/medical insurance,annuity insurance and life insurance
proper.
Life insurance may be defined as acontract in which the insurer in
consideration of a certain premium,either in a lump sum or by otherperiodical payments, agrees to pay to
the assured, or to the person for whose
benefit the policy is taken, the assuredsum of money, on the happening of aspecified event contingent on the
human life or at the expiry of certainperiod. Thus, the insurance company
undertakes to insure the life of a personin exchange for a sum of money calledpremium. This premium may be paidin one lump sum, or periodically i.e.,monthly, quarterly, half yearly or
yearly. At the same time, the companypromises to pay a certain sum of moneyeither on the death of the person or onhis attaining a certain age (i.e., theexpiry of certain period). Thus, the
person is sure that a specified amountwill be given to him when he attains acertain age or that his dependents willget that sum in the event of his death.This agreement or contract whichcontains all the terms and conditions
is put in writing and such document iscalled the policy. The person whose lifeis insured is called the assured. Theinsurance company is the insurer and
the consideration paid by the assuredis the premium. The premium can bepaid periodically in instalments.This insurance provides protectionto the family at the premature death or
gives adequate amount at old age whenearning capacities are reduced. Theinsurance is not only a protection butis a sort of investment because a certainsum is returnable to the insured at
the time of death or at the expiry of acertain period.Life insurance also encouragessavings as the amount of premium hasto be paid regularly. It thus, providesa sense of security to the insured andhis dependents.
The general principles of insurancediscussed in the previous section apply
92BUSINESSSTUDIES
to life insurance also with a few
exceptions. The main elements of a lifeinsurance contract are:(i)The life insurance contract must
have all the essentials of a validcontract. Certain elements like offerand acceptance, free  consent,capacity to enter into a contract,lawful consideration and lawfulobject must be present for the
contract to be valid;(ii)The con
tract of life insurance is acontract of utmost good faith. Theassured should be honest andtruthful in giving information to the
insurance company. He mustdisclose all material facts about hishealth to the insurer. It is his duty
to disclose accurately all materialfacts known to him even if the
insurer does not ask him;(iii)In 
life insurance, the insured musthave insurable interest in the lifeassured. Without insurable interestthe contract of insurance is void. In
case of life insurance, insurableinterest must be present at the timewhen the insurance is affected. It isnot necessary that the assuredshould have insurable interest atthe time of maturity also. Forexample, a person is presumed tohave an interest in his own life andevery part of it, a creditor has aninsurable interest in the life of his
debtor,  and a 
proprietor of a drama
company has an insurable interest
in the lives of the actors;(iv)Life insurance contract is not a
contract of indemnity. The life
of a human being cannot be
compensated and only a specified
sum of money is paid. That is whythe amount payable in life
insurance on the happening of the
event is fixed in advance. The sum
of money payable is fixed, at thetime of entering into the contract. A
contract of life insurance, therefore,
is not a contract of indemnity.Types of life insurance policiesThe document containing the writtencontract between the insurer and the
insured alongwith the terms and
conditions of insurance is called the
Policy. After the proposal form is filledby the insured (or the proposer) and
the insurer (insurance company)
accepts the form and the premium, a
policy is issued to the insurer.
People have different requirementsand therefore they would like a policy
to fulfill all their needs. The needs of
people for life insurance can be family
needs, children™s needs, old age and
special needs. To meet the needs of
people the insurers have developed
different types of products such as
Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type
plans, combination of Whole Life and
Endowment type plans, Children™s
Assurance plans and Annuity plans.
Some of these are explained below:(i)Whole Life Policy:
 In this kind ofpolicy, the amount payable to theinsured will not be paid before thedeath of the assured. The sum thenbecomes payable only to the
beneficiaries or heir of the deceased.
93BUSINESS SERVICESThe premium will be payable for a
fixed period (20 or 30 years) or for thewhole life of the assured. If the premiumis payable for a fixed period, the policy will

continue till the death of the assured.(ii)Endowment Life AssurancePolicy: The insurer (InsuranceCompany) undertakes to pay a specifiedsum when the insured attains aparticular age or on his death which
ever is earlier. The sum is payable to his

legal heir/s or nominee named thereinin case of death of the assured.Otherwise, the sum will be paid to the
assured after a fixed period i.e., 
till he/she attains a particular age. Thus, the
endowment policy matures after a
limted number of years.
(iii)Joint Life Policy: This policy istaken up by two or more persons. The
premium is paid jointly or by either of
them in instalments or lump sum. Theassured sum or policy money is payableupon the death of any one person to the

other survivor or survivors. Usually this
policy is taken up by husband and wife
jointly or by two partners in a
partnership firm where the amount is
payable to the survivor on the death of
either of the two.
(iv)Annuity Policy: Under this policy,the assured sum or policy money ispayable after the assured attains acertain age in monthly, quarterly, half
yearly or annual instalments. The
premium is paid in instalments over a
certain period or single premium may
be paid by the assured. This is useful
to those who prefer a regular income
after a certain age.
(v)Children™s Endowment Policy:
This policy is taken by a person for his/her children to meet the expenses of
their education or marriage. Theagreement states that a certain sum will
be paid by the insurer when thechildren attain a particular age. Thepremium is paid by the person enteringinto the contract. However, no premium

wil be paid, if he dies before the maturity
of the policy.FIRE INSURANCEFire insurance is a contract wherebythe insurer, in consideration of the

premium paid, undertakes to makegood any loss or damage caused by fireduring a specified period upto theamount specified in the policy.
Normally, the fire insurance policy is
for a period of one year after which it isto be renewed from time to time. Thepremium may be paid either in lumpsum or instalments. A claim for lossby fire must satisfy the two following
conditions:(i)There must be actual loss; and
(ii)F
ire must be accidental and non-intentional.The risk covered by a fire insurancecontract is the loss resulting from fire
or some other cause, and which is theproximate cause of the loss. Ifoverheating without ignition causes
damage, it will not be regarded as a fire
loss within the meaning of fire
insurance and the loss will not berecoverable from the insurer.
A fire insurance contract is basedon certain fundamental principles

94BUSINESSSTUDIES
Difference between Life, Fire and Marine InsurancefosisaBecnereffidecnarusnIefiLecnarusnieriFecnarusnIeniraM1tcejbuSrettaMforettamtcejbusehTnamuhsiecnarusni.efilrettamtcejbusehTlacisyhpynasi.stessaroytreporprettamtcejbusehTroograc,pihsasi.thgierf2tnemelEehtsahecnarusnIefiLnoitcetorpfostnemelerotnemtsevnidna.htobsahecnarusnieriFfotnemeleehtylnotondnanoitcetorpfotnemeleeht.tnemtsevniecnarusnieniraMehtylnosahfotnemele.noitcetorp3elbarusnItseretnitseretnielbarusnIehttatneserpebtsumehtgnitceffefoemitebtondeentubycilopemitehttayrassecensllafmialcehtnehw.eudtseretnielbarusnItcejbusehtnoebtsumrettamehttahtobtneserpgnitceffefoemitsallewsaycilopmialcehtnehw.eudsllaftseretnielbarusnItatneserpebtsumnehwemitehtroeudsllafmialcssolfoemitehtta.ylno4noitaruDycilopecnarusniefiLraeyasdeecxeyllausuregnolrofnekatsidnamorfgnignarsdoireprosraey03ot5.efilelohwecnarusnieriFseodyllausuycilop.raeyadeecxetonecnarusnieniraMroenorofsiyciloproegayovfodoirep.dexim5ytinmednItonsiecnarusniefiLelpicnirpehtnodesabehT.ytinmednifodiapsiderussamusehtnorehtieniatrecfognineppahytirutamnorotneve.ycilopehtfoasiecnarusnieriFfotcartnocehT.ytinmednimialcnacderusnilautcaehtylnossolfotnuoma.rerusniehtmorfehtoteudssolehTdeifinmednisierifehtottcejbusfotimilmumixam.tnuomaycilopehtecnarusnieniraMfotcartnocasiehT.ytinmednimialcnacderusnifoeulavtekramehttsocdnapihsehtdeyortsedsdoogfossolehtdnaaestaeblliw.deifinmedni6ssoL.tnemerusaemtonsissoL.elbarusaemsissoL.elbarusaemsissoL.elbarusaem7rednerruSdiaproeulav.eulavpuycilopecnarusniefiLeulavrednerrusasah.eulavpudiaproecnarusnieriFynaevahtonseodroeulavrednerrus.eulavpudiapecnarusnieniraMynaevahtonseodroeulavrednerrus.eulavpudiap
95BUSINESS SERVICESwhich have been discussed in general
principles. The main elements of a fire
insurance contract are:(i)In fire insurance, the insured must
have insurable interest in the subjectmatter of the insurance. Without
insurable interest the contract ofinsurance is void. In case of fireinsurance, unlike life insurance
insurable interest must be presentboth at the time of insurance and atthe time of loss. For example, a
person has insurable interest in the
property he owns, a businessmanhas insurable interest in his stock,plant, machinery and building,  an
agent has an insurable interest inthe property of his principal, apartner has insurable interest in the
property of a partnership firm, and

a mortgagee has insurable interest
in the property, which is mortgaged.(ii)Similar to 
the life insurancecontract, the contract of fire
insurance is a contract of utmostgood faith i.e., uberrimae fidei
. Theinsured should be truthful and
honest in giving information to theinsurance company regarding the
subject matter of the insurance. He
is duty-bound to disclose
accurately all facts regarding thenature of property and risksattached to it. The insurance
company should also disclose the
facts of the policy to the proposer.
(iii)The contract of fire insurance is acontract of strict indemnity. Theinsured can, in the event of loss,recover the actual amount of loss
from the insurer. This is subject to

the maximum amount for which thesubject matter is insured. Forexample, if a person has insured his
house for Rs. 4,00,000 the insurer
is not necessarily liable to pay that
amount, although the house mayhave been totally destroyed by fire;but he will pay the actual loss after
deducting depreciation within the
maximum limit of Rs. 4,00,000. The
purpose being that a person shouldnot be allowed to gain by insurance.
8tnuomayciloPynaroferusninacenOefilnitnuoma.ecnarusni,ecnarusnierifnIehtfotnuomaehtebtonnacycilopehtnahteromehtfoeulav.rettamtcejbusecnarusnieniramnIehtfotnuomaehtehtebnacycilopehtfoeulavtekram.ogracropihs.9ycnegnitnoCksirfofotnemelenasierehTtneveehT.ytiniatrecytirutamfohtaed,.e.iotdnuobsiyciloproaeroferehT.neppah.tneserpeblliwmialc,.e.itneveehTerifybnoitcurtsed.neppahtonyamnasierehTfotnemelednaytiniatrecnuonebyamereht.mialcssol,.e.itneveehTruccotonyamaestaonebyamerehtdnanasierehT.mialcfotnemele.ytniatrecnu
96BUSINESSSTUDIES
(iv)The insu
rer is liable to compensateonly when fire is the proximatecause of damage or loss.MARINE INSURANCEA marine insurance contract is an
agreement whereby the insurer
undertakes to indemnify the insuredin the manner and to the extent therebyagreed against marine losses. Marineinsurance provides protection againstloss by marine perils or perils of the sea.
Marine perils are collision of ship withthe rock, or ship attacked by theenemies, fire and captured by piratesand actions of the captains and crew ofthe ship. These perils cause damage,
destruction or disappearance of theship and cargo and non-payment of
freight. So, marine insurance insures
ship hull, cargo and freight. Thus, it is
a device wherein the insurer undertakesto compensate the owner of a ship or

cargo for complete or partial loss at sea.The insurer gurantees to make good thelosses due to damage to the ship or cargo

arising out of the risks incidental to seavoyages. The insurer in this case is knownas the underwriter and a certain sum of
money  is paid by the insured inconsideration for the guarantee/
protection he gets. Marine insurance isslightly different from other types. There
are three things involved i.e., ship or hull,

cargo or goods, and freight.
(a)Ship or hull insurance:
 Since theship is exposed to many danger
s atsea, the insurance policy is forindemnifying the insured for losses
caused by damage to the ship.(b)Cargo insurance:
 The cargo whilebeing transported by ship is subjectto many risks. These may be at port
i.e., risk of theft, lost goods or on

voyage etc. Thus, an insurance
policy can be issued to cover againstsuch risks to cargo.(c)Freight insurance:
 If the cargo doesnot reach the destination due todamage or loss in transit, theshipping company is not paid freightcharges. Freight insurance is forreimbursing the loss of freight to theshipping company i.e., the insured.
The fundamental principles ofmarine insurance are the same as thegeneral principles. The main elementsof a marine insurance contract are:(i)Unlike life insurance, the contract
of marine insurance is a contract of
indemnity. The insured can, in theevent of loss recover the actualamount of loss from the insurer.
Under no circumstances, theinsured is allowed to make profitout of the marine insurancecontract. But cargo policies providecommercial indemnity rather than
strict indemnity. The insurerspromise to indemnify the insuredﬁin the manner and to the extentagreed.ﬂ In case of ‚Hull Policy™, theamount insured is fixed at a levelabove the current market value;(ii)Similar 
to life and fire insurance, thecontract of marine insurance is a
contract of utmost good faith. Both
the insured and insurer must
disclose everything, which is in theirknowledge and can affect theinsurance contract. The insured is
