CHAPTER 2FORMS OF BUSINESSORGANISATION
LEARNING OBJECTIVESAfter studying this chapter, you should be able to:
•identify different forms of business organisation;•explain features, merits and limitations of select forms of businessorganisation;•distinguish between various forms of organisation; and•analyse factors determining choice of an appropriate form of
business organisation.
22BUSINESSSTUDIES
2.1I
NTRODUCTIONIf one is planning to start a business oris interested in expanding an existingone, an important decision relates tothe choice of the form of organisation.The most appropriate form isdetermined by weighing theadvantages and disadvantages of eachtype of organisation against one™s ownrequirements.Various forms of business
organisations from which one canchoose the right one include:(a)Sole proprietorship,
(b)Joint Hindu family business,
(c)Partnership,
(d)Cooperative societies, and
(e)Joint stock company.
Let us start our discussion withsole proprietorshipŠthe simplest form
of business organisation, and thenmove on to analysing more complexforms of organisations.2.2S
OLE PROPRIETORSHIPDo you often go in the evenings to buyregisters, pens, chart papers, etc., froma small neighbourhood stationerystore? Well, in all probability in the
course of your transactions, you haveinteracted with a sole proprietor.
Sole proprietorship is a popularform of business organisation and isthe most suitable form for smallbusinesses, especially in their initialyears of operation. Sole proprietorshipNeha, a bright final year student was waiting for her results to be declared.While at home she decided to put her free time to use. Having an aptitude forpainting, she tried her hand at decorating clay pots and bowls with designs.She was excited at the praise showered on her by her friends and acquaintanceson her work. She even managed to sell a few pieces of unique hand pottery fromher home to people living in and around her colony. Operating from home, she
was able to save on rental payments. She gained a lot of popularity by word ofmouth publicity as a sole proprietor. She further perfected her skills of painting
pottery and created new motifs and designs. All this generated great interest
among her customers and provided a boost to the demand for her products. Bythe end of summer, she found that she had been able to make a profit of Rs.
2500 from her paltry investment in colours, pottery and drawing sheets. She feltmotivated to take up this work as a career. She has, therefore, decided to set up
her own artwork business. She can continue running the business on her ownas a sole proprietor, but she needs more money for doing business on a larger

scale. Her father has suggested that she should form a  partnership with hercousin to meet the need for additional funds and for sharing the responsibilitiesand risks. Side by side, he is of the opinion that it is possible that the business
might grow further and may require the formation of a company. She is in a fix
as to what form of business organisation she should go in for?
23FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATIONrefers to a form of business organisationwhich is owned, managed andcontrolled by an individual who is therecipient of all profits and bearer of allrisks. This is evident from the termitself. The word ﬁsoleﬂ implies ﬁonlyﬂ,and ﬁproprietorﬂ refers to ﬁownerﬂ.Hence, a sole proprietor is the one whois the only owner of a business.This form of business is particularlycommon in areas of personalisedservices such as beauty parlours, hairsaloons and small scale activities likerunning a retail shop in a locality.payment of debts in case the assets ofthe business are not sufficient to meetall the debts. As such the owner™spersonal possessions such as his/herpersonal car and other assets could besold for repaying the debt. Suppose thetotal outside liabilities of XYZ drycleaner, a sole proprietorship firm, are
Rs. 80,000 
at the time of dissolution, butits assets are Rs. 60,000 only. In such a
situation the proprietor will have to bringin Rs. 20,000 from her personal sources
even if she has to sell her personalproperty to repay the firm™s debts.FeaturesSalient characteristics of the soleproprietorship form of organisation areas follows:(i)Formation and closure:
 Hardlyany legal formalities are required to
start a sole proprietary business,though in some cases one may requirea license. There is no separate law thatgoverns sole proprietorship. Closure ofthe business can also be done easily.Thus, there is ease in formation as wellas closure of business.(ii)Liability:
 Sole proprietors haveunlimited liability. This implies that theowner is personally responsible for(iii)Sole risk bearer and profit
recipient: The risk of failure ofbusiness is borne all alone by the sole
proprietor. However, if the business is
successful, the proprietor enjoys all thebenefits. He receives all the businessprofits which become a direct rewardfor his risk bearing.(iv)Control:
 The right to run thebusiness and make all decisions liesabsolutely with the sole proprietor. He
can carry out his plans without anyinterference from others.(v)No separate entity:
 In the eyes ofthe law, no distinction is made between
the sole trader and his business, asbusiness does not have an identity
Sole trader is a type of business unit where a person is solely responsible forproviding the capital, for bearing the risk of the enterprise and for the managementof business.J.L. HansenThe individual proprietorship is the form of business organisation at the head ofwhich stands an individual as one who is responsible, who directs its operationsand who alone runs the risk of failure.L.H. Haney
