BUSINESS STUDIESTextbook for Class XI
First EditionMarch 2006  Phalguna 1927ReprintedOctober 2006  Kartika 1928December 2007  Agrahayana 1929March 2009  Phalguna 1930January 2010  Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932January 2012 Magha 1933March 2013 Phalguna 1934November 2013 Kartika 1935PD 120T RNB© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006``
``
` 90.00Printed on 80 GSM paper withNCERT watermarkPublished at the Publication Divisionby the Secretary, National Councilof Educational Research andTraining, Sri Aurobindo Marg, NewDelhi 110 016 and printed at
Saharanpur Electric Press, BomanjiRoad, Saharanpur 247 001 (UP)ISBN  81-7450-530-XALL RIGHTS RESERVEDqNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrievalsystem or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the priorpermission of the publisher.qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without thepublisher™s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that inwhich it is published.qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any othermeans is incorrect and should be unacceptable.Publication TeamHead, Publication:Ashok SrivastavaDivisionChief Production:Kalyan BanerjeeOfficerChief Business:Gautam GangulyManagerChief Editor:Naresh Yadav(Contractual Service)Editor:R.N.BhardwajProduction Assistant:Prakash Veer SinghCoverKaran ChadhaOFFICES OF THE PUBLICATIONDIVISION, NCERTNCERT CampusSri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.NavjivanAhmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus Stop
PanihatiKolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454CWC ComplexMaligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends thatchildren™s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home
and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantlyfurther in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy of Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principalsand teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.  We must recognisethat, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.  Inculcating
creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode offunctioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching.  The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this book proves for making
children™s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress
or boredom.  Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book.  We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisorygroup in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisorfor this book, Prof. Sanjay K. Jain, for guiding the work of this committee.
ivSeveral teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we aregrateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to theinstitutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw
upon their resources, materials and personnel. We are especially gratefulto the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable time and contribution. Asan organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestionswhich will enable us to undertake further revision and refinements.DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of Educational20 December 2005Research and Training
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENTCOMMITTEECHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOKS AT THEHIGHER SECONDARY LEVELHari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,KolkataCHIEF ADVISORSanjay K. Jain, Professor, Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi,DelhiMEMBERSAnand Saxena, Reader, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, University of DelhiDavinder K. Vaid, Professor, DESSH, NCERT, New DelhiGarima Gupta, Lecturer, PGDAV College, University of Delhi, New DelhiG.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas College, University of DelhiJ.K. Parida, Professor, Department of Commerce, Utkal University,Bhubaneswar, OrissaK.V. Achalapati, Professor and Head, Department of Commerce, OsmaniaUniversity, HyderabadM.M. Goyal, Reader, PGDAV College, University of DelhiM. Usha, Associate Professor, University College of Commerce and BusinessManagement, Osmania University, Hyderabad
Pooja Dasani, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary School, Gol Dakkhana,New Delhi
Shailendra Nigam, NIILM Centre for Management Studies, Sher Shah SuriMarg, New DelhiMEMBER-COORDINATORMinoo Nandrajog, Reader, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTThe National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledgesthe valuable comments and suggestions of the following, while preparing
the textbook: Professor D.P. Sharma, Former Vice Chancellor, BarkatullahUniversity, Bhopal; S.K. Bansal, PGT Commerce (Retired), CommercialSenior Secondary School, Darya Ganj, Delhi; Vijay Kumar Yadav, PGTCommerce, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Jawaharlal Nehru Campus, New Delhi;K. Vasudeva Murthy, Lecturer in Commerce, Mahajana™s Pre-UniversityCollege, Jayalaxmipuram, Mysore; Dwarikanath Mishra, PGT Commerce,DAV School, Unit-8, Bhubaneswar, Orissa.Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Departmentof Education in Social Sciences and Humanities for her constant support
and guidance at every stage of the textbook development process.The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions ofDinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station; Ritu Sharma and Mahesh SinghBhandari, DTP Operator; and Bharati Guleria, Copy Editor and SukeshniJulka, Proof Reader in shaping this book. Last but not the least, the effortsof the Publication Department, NCERT are also duly acknowledged.
NOTE TO THE TEACHERThis textbook is expected to provide a good understanding of the environmentin which a business operates. A manager has to analyse the complex, dynamic
situations in which a business is placed. Therefore, content enrichment in
the form of business news and abstracts of articles from business journals
and magazines has been given as inset material (boxes). This will encourage
students to be observant about all business activity and discover what is
happening in business organisations with the expection that they will update
their knowledge through the use of libraries, newspapers, business oriented
TV programmes and the internet. Various types of question are given andcase problems, multiple choice questions have been introduced to test the
application of subject knowledge to realistic business situations.
CONTENTSFOREWORDiiiPART  I   FOUNDATIONS OF BUSINESS1CHAPTER1Nature and Purpose of Business2CHAPTER2Forms of Business Organisation21CHAPTER3Private, Public and Global Enterprises55CHAPTER4Business Services77CHAPTER5Emerging Modes of Business110CHAPTER6Social Responsibilities of Businessand Business Ethics140PART  II   CORPORATE ORGANISATION, FINANCE AND TRADE159CHAPTER7Formation of a Company160CHAPTER8Sources of Business Finance181CHAPTER9Small Business207CHAPTER10Internal Trade225CHAPTER11International Business-I
251CHAPTER12International Business-II278
CONSTITUTION OF INDIAPart III (Articles 12 Œ 35)(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptionsand reasonable restrictions)guarantees theseFundamental RightsRight to Equality·before law and equal protection of laws;·irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;·of opportunity in public employment;·by abolition of untouchability and titles.Right to Freedom
·of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;·of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;·of protection of life and personal liberty;·of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;·of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.Right against Exploitation
·for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;·for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.Right to Freedom of Religion·freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;·freedom to manage religious affairs;·freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;·freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educationalinstitutions wholly maintained by the State.Cultural and Educational Rights·for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;·for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.Right to Constitutional Remedies
·by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and HighCourts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
