96CHEMISTRYScientists are constantly discovering new compounds, orderlyarranging the facts about them, trying to explain with theexisting knowledge, organising to modify the earlier views orevolve theories for explaining the newly observed facts.UNIT 4After studying this Unit, you will beable toŁunderstand KÖssel-Lewisapproach to chemical bonding;Łexplain the octet rule and itslimitations, draw Lewis
structures of simple molecules;Łexplain the formation of differenttypes of bonds;Łdescribe the VSEPR theory and
predict the geometry of simplemolecules;Łexplain the valence bondapproach for the formation ofcovalent bonds;Łpredict the directional propertiesof covalent bonds;Łexplain the different types ofhybridisation  involving s, p andd orbitals and draw shapes ofsimple covalent molecules;Łdescribe the molecular orbitaltheory of homonuclear diatomic
molecules;Łexplain the concept of hydrogenbond.CHEMICAL BONDING ANDMOLECULAR STRUCTUREMatter is made up of one or different type of elements.Under normal conditions no other element exists as anindependent atom in nature, except noble gases. However,a group of atoms is found to exist together as one specieshaving characteristic properties. Such a group of atoms iscalled a molecule. Obviously there must be some forcewhich holds these constituent atoms  together in themolecules. The attractive force which holds variousconstituents (atoms, ions, etc.) together in differentchemical species is called a chemical bond. Since theformation of chemical compounds takes place as a resultof combination of atoms of various elements in differentways, it raises many questions. Why do atoms combine?
Why are only certain combinations possible? Why do someatoms combine while certain others do not? Why do
molecules possess definite shapes? To answer suchquestions different theories and concepts have been putforward from time to time. These are Kössel-Lewisapproach, Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR)Theory, Valence Bond (VB) Theory and Molecular Orbital(MO) Theory. The evolution of various theories of valence
and the interpretation of the nature of chemical bonds haveclosely been related to the developments in theunderstanding of the structure of atom, the electronic
configuration of elements and the periodic table. Every
system tends to be more stable and bonding is nature™sway of lowering the energy of the system to attain stability.
