70CHEMISTRYThe Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept inchemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the everyday
support for students, it suggests new avenues of research to
professionals, and it provides a succinct organization of the
whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable demonstration of the
fact that the chemical elements are not a random cluster of
entities but instead display trends and lie together in families.
An awareness of the Periodic Table is essential to anyone who
wishes to disentangle the world and see how it is built up
from the fundamental building blocks of the chemistry, the
chemical elements.Glenn T. SeaborgIn this Unit, we will study the historical development of the
Periodic Table as it stands today and the Modern PeriodicLaw. We will also learn how the periodic classificationfollows as a logical consequence of the electronicconfiguration of atoms. Finally, we shall examine some ofthe periodic trends in the physical and chemical propertiesof the elements.3.1WHY DO WE NEED TO CLASSIFY ELEMENTS ?We know by now that the elements are the basic units of alltypes of matter. In 1800, only 31 elements were known. By1865, the number of identified elements had more than
doubled to 63. At present 114 elements are known. Ofthem, the recently discovered elements are man-made.
Efforts to synthesise new elements are continuing. Withsuch a large number of elements it is very difficult to studyindividually the chemistry of all these elements and theirinnumerable compounds individually. To ease out thisproblem, scientists searched for a systematic way to
organise their knowledge by classifying the elements. Notonly that it would rationalize known chemical facts aboutelements, but even predict new ones for undertaking furtherstudy.UNIT 3After studying this Unit, you will beable toŁappreciate how the concept ofgrouping elements in accordance totheir properties led to thedevelopment of Periodic Table.Łunderstand  the Periodic Law;Łunderstand the  significance ofatomic number and electronicconfiguration as the basis forperiodic classification;Łname the elements with
Z >100 according to IUPACnomenclature;Łclassify elements into s, p, d, fblocks and learn their main
characteristics;Łrecognise the periodic trends in
physical and chemical properties ofelements;Łcompare the reactivity of elements
and correlate it with theiroccurrence in nature;Łexplain the relationship  between
ionization enthalpy and metalliccharacter;Łuse  scientific  vocabulary
appropriately to communicate ideasrelated to certain importantproperties  of atoms e.g., atomic/ionic radii, ionization enthalpy,electron gain enthalpy,electronegativity, valence ofelements.CLASSIFICATION OF ELEMENTS ANDPERIODICITY IN PROPERTIES
