326CHEMISTRY
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES
AND TECHNIQUESAfter studying this unit, you will be
able to•••••understand reasons fortetravalence of carbon and
shapes of organic molecules;
•••••write structures of organic
molecules in various ways;•••••classify the organic compounds;•••••name the compounds accordingto IUPAC system of
nomenclature and also derive

their structures from the given

names;•••••understand the concept oforganic reaction mechanism;
•••••explain the influence ofelectronic displacements on

structure and reactivity of

organic compounds;•••••recognise the types of organic
reactions;
•••••learn the techniques of
purification of organic
compounds;•••••write the chemical reactions
involved in the qualitative
analysis of organic compounds;•••••understand the principlesinvolved in quantitative analysis
of organic compounds.
In the previous unit you have learnt that the element
carbon has the unique property called 
catenation due to
which it forms covalent bonds with other carbon atoms.
It also forms covalent bonds with atoms of other elements
like hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus and
halogens. The resulting compounds are studied under aseparate branch of chemistry called 
organic chemistry
.This unit incorporates some basic principles andtechniques of analysis required for understanding the
formation and properties of organic compounds.
12.1 GENERAL INTRODUCTIONOrganic compounds are vital for sustaining life on earth
and include complex molecules like genetic information
bearing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and proteins that

constitute essential compounds of our blood, muscles and
skin. Organic chemicals appear in materials like clothing,

fuels, polymers, dyes and medicines. These are some of
the important areas of application of these compounds.
Science of organic chemistry is about two hundred
years old. Around the year 1780, chemists began to

distinguish between organic compounds obtained from

plants and animals and inorganic compounds prepared

from mineral sources. Berzilius, a Swedish chemist

proposed that a ‚vital force™ was responsible for the

formation of organic compounds. However, this notion

was rejected in 1828 when F. Wohler synthesised an

organic compound, urea from an inorganic compound,

ammonium cyanate.422
Heat
NHCNONHCONH

Ammonium cyanate          UreaThe pioneering synthesis of acetic acid by Kolbe (1845)and that of methane by Berthelot (1856) showed
conclusively that organic compounds could be synthesised
from inorganic sources in a laboratory.
UNIT 12
327ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
The development of electronic theory of
covalent bonding ushered organic chemistry
into its modern shape.
12.2TETRAVALENCE OF CARBON:
SHAPES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS12.2.1 The Shapes of  Carbon  Compounds
The knowledge of fundamental concepts ofmolecular structure helps in understanding

and predicting the properties of organic
compounds. You have already learnt theories
of valency and molecular structure in Unit 4.

Also, you already know that tetravalence of
carbon and the formation of covalent bonds
by it are explained in terms of its electronic

configuration and the hybridisation of s and
p orbitals. It may be recalled that formation
and the shapes of molecules like methane
(CH4), ethene (C2H4), ethyne (C2H2) areexplained in terms of the use of 
sp3, sp2 andsp hybrid orbitals by carbon atoms in the
respective molecules.
Hybridisation influences the bond lengthand bond enthalpy (strength) in organic

compounds. The 
sp hybrid orbital contains
more 
s character and hence it is closer to its
nucleus and forms shorter and stronger

bonds than the sp3 hybrid 
orbital. The sp2hybrid orbital is intermediate in 
s characterbetween sp and 
sp3 and, hence, the length
and enthalpy of the bonds it forms, are also
intermediate 
between them. The change inhybridisation affects the electronegativity of

carbon. The greater the 
s character of the
hybrid orbitals, the greater is the
electronegativity. Thus, a carbon atom having

an sp hybrid orbital with 50% s character is
more electronegative than that possessing 
 sp
2or sp3 hybridised orbitals. This relative
electronegativity is reflected in several
physical and chemical properties of the
molecules concerned, about which you will

learn in later units.
12.2.2Some Characteristic Features of 
BondsIn a  (pi) bond formation, parallel orientation
of the two p orbitals on adjacent atoms is
necessary for a proper sideways overlap.
Thus, in H2C=CH2 molecule all the atoms
must be in the same plane. The 
p orbitals
are mutually parallel and both 
the p orbitals
are perpendicular to the plane of the
molecule. Rotation of one CH2 fragment with
respect to other interferes with maximum
overlap of p orbitals and, therefore, such
rotation 
about 
carbon-carbon double bond(C=C) is restricted. The 
electron charge cloud
of the  bond is located above and below the
plane of bonding atoms. This results in theelectrons being easily available to the
attacking reagents. In general, bonds provide
the most reactive centres in the molecules
containing multiple bonds.
Problem 12.1How many  and 
 bonds are present in
each of the following molecules?(a) HCCCH=CHCH3 (b) CH2=C=CHCH3Solution(a) C Œ C: 4; CŒH : 6; C=C :1; CC:2(b) C Œ C: 3; CŒH: 6; C=C: 2.Problem 12.2What is the type of hybridisation of eachcarbon in the following compounds?
(a) CH3Cl, (b) (CH3)2CO, (c) CH3CN,(d) HCONH2, (e) CH3CH=CHCNSolution
(a) sp3, (b) sp3, sp2, (c) sp3, sp, (d) sp2, (e)sp3, sp2, sp2, spProblem 12.3
Write 
the state of  hybridisation of carbon
in the following compounds 
and shapesof each of the molecules.(a) H2C=O, (b) CH3F, (c) HC
N.Solution
(a) sp2 hybridised carbon, trigonal planar;
(b) sp3 hybridised carbon, tetrahedral; (c)
sp hybridised carbon, linear.

328CHEMISTRY
12.3STRUCTURAL REPRESENTATIONS
OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS12.3.1Complete, Condensed and Bond-line
Structural Formulas
Structures of organic compounds are

represented in several ways. The 
Lewisstructure
 or dot structure, dash structure,
condensed structure and bond line structural

formulas are some of the specific types. The

Lewis structures, however, can be simplified

by representing the two-electron covalent

bond by a dash (Œ). Such a structural formula

focuses on the electrons involved in bond

formation.  A single dash represents a single

bond, double dash  is used for double bond

and a triple dash represents triple bond. Lone-

pairs of electrons on heteroatoms (
e.g.,oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, halogens etc.) may

or may not be shown. Thus, ethane (C
2H6),ethene (C2H4), ethyne (C2H2) and methanol(CH3OH) can be represented by the followingstructural formulas. Such structural

representations are called 
complete structuralformulas
.Similarly, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3can be further condensed to CH3(CH2)6CH3.For further simplification, organic chemists
use another way of representing the

structures, in which only lines are used. In

this bond-line structural representation of
organic compounds, carbon and hydrogen

atoms are not shown and the lines
representing carbon-carbon bonds are  drawn

in a 
zig-zag fashion. The only atoms
specifically written are oxygen, chlorine,

nitrogen etc. The terminals denote methyl

(ŒCH3) groups (unless indicated otherwise by
a functional group), while the line junctions

denote carbon atoms bonded to appropriate

number of hydrogens required to satisfy the

valency of the carbon atoms. Some of the
examples are represented as follows:
(i) 3-Methyloctane can be represented invarious forms as:
(a)   CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3                     |                   CH3These structural formulas can be further
abbreviated by omitting some or all of the

dashes representing covalent bonds and by

indicating the number of identical groups

attached to an atom by a subscript. The
resulting expression of the compound is called

a condensed structural formula
. Thus, ethane,ethene, ethyne and methanol can be written
as:CH3CH3        H2C=CH2       HC
CH            CH
3OHEthane   Ethene      Ethyne       Methanol        Ethane                  Ethene   Ethyne              Methanol(ii) Various ways of representing 2-bromo
butane are:
(a)  CH3CHBrCH2CH3  (b)  (c)  (b)(c)
329ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
In cyclic compounds, the bond-line formulas
may be given as follows:Cyclopropane
CyclopentanechlorocyclohexaneProblem 12.4
Expand each of the following condensedformulas into their complete structural

formulas.
(a) CH3CH2COCH2CH3(b) CH3CH=CH(CH2)3CH3Solution(b)SolutionCondensed formula:
(a) HO(CH2)3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)2(b)HOCH(CN)
2Bond-line formula:
(a)(b)Problem 12.5For each of the following compounds,
write a  condensed formula and also their

bond-line formula.
(a)HOCH
2CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3(b)(a)Problem 12.6Expand each of the following bond-line
formulas to show all the atoms including

carbon and hydrogen
(a)(b)(c)(d)Solution
330CHEMISTRY
 Framework model Ball and stick modelSpace filling modelFig. 12.212.3.2Three-Dimensional
Representation of Organic

MoleculesThe three-dimensional (3-D) structure of

organic molecules can be represented on

paper by using certain conventions. For
example, by using solid (
) and dashed() wedge formula, the 3-D image of a
molecule from a two-dimensional picture

can be perceived. In these formulas the

solid-wedge is used to indicate a bond
projecting out of the plane of paper, towards

the observer. The dashed-wedge is used to

depict the bond projecting out of the plane of

the paper and away from the observer. Wedges

are shown in such a way that the broad end

of the wedge is towards the observer. The

bonds lying in plane of the paper are depicted

by using a normal line (Š). 3-D representation

of methane molecule on paper has been
shown in Fig. 12.1.Fig. 12.1 Wedge-and-dash representation of CH
4Molecular ModelsMolecular models are physical devices thatare used for a better visualisation and

perception of three-dimensional shapes of

organic molecules. These are made of wood,

plastic or metal and are commercially
available. Commonly three types of molecular
models are used: (1) 
Framework model, (2)Ball-and-stick model, and (3) Space fillingmodel. In the framework model only the
bonds connecting the atoms of a molecule
and not the atoms themselves are shown.

This model emphasizes the pattern of bonds

of a molecule while ignoring the size of atoms.
In the ball-and-stick model, 
both the atomsand the bonds are shown. Balls represent

atoms and the stick denotes a bond.
Compounds containing C=C (e.g., ethene) can

best be represented by using springs in place
of sticks. These models are referred to as 
ball-and-spring model. The 
space-filling modelemphasises the relative size of each atom

based on its van der Waals radius. Bonds

are not shown in this model. It conveys the
volume occupied by each atom in the
molecule. In addition to these models,
computer graphics can also be used for
molecular modelling.
331ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
12.4CLASSIFICATION OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDSThe existing large number of organic
compounds and their ever-increasing

numbers has made it necessary to classify
them on the basis of their structures. Organic

compounds are broadly classified as follows:
I.Acyclic or open chain compoundsThese compounds are also called as 
aliphaticcompounds and consist of straight or
branched chain compounds, for example:(homocyclic). Sometimes atoms other thancarbon are also present in the ring

(heterocylic). Some examples of this type of
compounds are:
    Cyclopropane        Cyclohexane
       Cyclohexene      Tetrahydrofuran
These exhibit some of the properties similar
to those of aliphatic compounds.Aromatic compoundsAromatic compounds are special types of

compounds. You will learn about these

compounds in detail in Unit 13. These include
benzene and other related ring compounds
(benzenoid). Like alicyclic compounds,
aromatic comounds may also have hetero

atom in the ring. Such compounds are called

hetrocyclic aromatic compounds. Some of the
examples of various types of aromatic

compounds are:
Benzenoid aromatic compounds    Benzene        Aniline            NaphthaleneNon-benzenoid compoundTropolone
IsobutaneAcetaldehydeAcetic acidCH3CH3EthaneIIAlicyclic or closed chain or ringcompoundsAlicyclic (aliphatic cyclic) compounds contain
carbon atoms joined in the form of a ring

332CHEMISTRY
Heterocyclic aromatic compounds   Furan             Thiophene            PyridineOrganic compounds can also be classifiedon the basis of functional groups, into 
familiesor homologous series.Functional GroupThe functional group may be defined as an
atom or group of atoms joined in a specific

manner which is responsible for the
characteristic chemical properties of the

organic compounds. The examples are
hydroxyl group (ŒOH), aldehyde group (ŒCHO)

and carboxylic acid group (ŒCOOH) etc.
Homologous SeriesA group or a series of organic compounds each

containing a characteristic functional group

forms a homologous series and the members

of the series are called homologues. Themembers of a homologous series can berepresented by general molecular formula and

the successive members differ from each other

in molecular formula by a ŒCH
2 unit. There
are a number of homologous series of
organic compounds. Some of these are

alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, haloalkanes,
alkanols, alkanals, alkanones, alkanoic acids,
amines etc.12.5NOM
ENCLATURE OF ORGANIC
COMPOUNDSOrganic chemistry deals with millions of

compounds. In order to clearly identify them, a

systematic method of naming has been
developed and is known as the IUPAC
(International Union of Pure and Applied

Chemistry) system of nomenclature. In this
systematic nomenclature, the names are

correlated with the structure such that the

reader or listener can deduce the structure from

the name.Before the IUPAC system of nomenclature,
however, organic compounds were assigned

names based on their origin or certain
properties. For instance, citric acid is named

so because it is found in citrus fruits and the
acid found in red ant is named formic acid
since the Latin word for ant is 
formica
. Thesenames are traditional and are considered as

trivial or common names. Some common
names are followed even today. For example,

Buckminsterfullerene is a common name

given to the newly discovered C
60 cluster
(a form of carbon) noting its structural

similarity to the geodesic domes popularised
by the famous architect R. Buckminster

Fuller. Common names are useful and in

many cases indispensable, particularly when

the alternative systematic names are lengthy

and complicated. Common names of some
organic compounds are given in Table 12.1.
Table 12.1Common or Trivial Names of Some
Organic Compounds
12.5.1  The IUPAC System of Nomenclature
A systematic name of an organic compound

is generally derived by identifying the parent
hydrocarbon and the functional group(s)
attached to it. See the example given below.
333ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
By further using prefixes
 and 
suffixes
, theparent name can be 
modified to obtain the
actual name. Compounds containing carbon

and hydrogen only are called hydrocarbons. A

hydrocarbon is termed saturated if it contains

only carbon-carbon single bonds. The IUPAC
name for a 
homologous series of suchcompounds is alkane. Paraffin (Latin: little
affinity) was the earlier name given to these

compounds. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are

those, which contain at least one carbon-
carbon double or triple bond.12.5.2IUPAC Nomenclature of  Alkanes
Straight chain hydrocarbons
: The names
of such compounds are based on their chain

structure, and end with suffix ‚-
ane™ and carrya prefix indicating the number of carbon

atoms present in the chain (except from CH
4to C4H10, where the prefixes are derived from
trivial names). The IUPAC names of some
straight chain saturated hydrocarbons are

given in Table 12.2. The alkanes in Table 12.2

differ from each other by merely the number
of -CH
2 groups in the chain. They are
homologues of alkane series.In order to name such compounds, the names
of alkyl groups are prefixed to the name of

parent alkane. An alkyl group is derived from

a saturated hydrocarbon by removing a

hydrogen atom from carbon.  Thus, CH
4becomes  -CH
3 and is called 
methyl group
. Analkyl group is named by substituting ‚
yl™ for‚ane™ in the corresponding alkane. Some alkyl
groups are listed in Table 12.3.
Table 12.3  Some Alkyl Groups
Table 12.2IUPAC 
Names of Some UnbranchedSaturated Hydrocarbons
Branched chain hydrocarbons: In a
branched chain compound small chains of

carbon atoms are attached at one or more

carbon atoms of the parent chain. The small

carbon chains (branches) are called alkyl
groups. For example:
CH3ŒCHŒCH2ŒCH3  CH3ŒCHŒCH2ŒCHŒCH3     
     CH3   
                  CH2CH3  CH3                  (a)                                 (b)Abbreviations are used for some alkyl
groups. For example, methyl is abbreviated

as Me, ethyl as Et, propyl as Pr and butyl as

Bu. The alkyl groups can be branched also.

Thus, propyl and butyl groups can have

branched structures as shown below.
CH3-CH-    CH
3-CH2-CH-     CH
3-CH-CH2-
   CH3  CH3    CH3       Isopropyl-             sec-Butyl-              Isobutyl-  CH3       CH3
    CH3-C-        CH
3-C-CH2-
  CH3          
          CH3                tert-Butyl-            Neopentyl-Common branched groups have specific
trivial names. For example, the propyl groups

can either be n-propyl group or isopropyl
group. The branched butyl groups are called

sec-butyl, isobutyl and tert-butyl group. We
also encounter the structural unit,
ŒCH2C(CH3)3, which is called neopentyl group.
Nomenclature of branched chain alkanes:We encounter a number of branched chain

alkanes. The rules for naming them are given

below.
334CHEMISTRY
separated from the groups by hyphens and
there is no break between methyl and

nonane.]4.If two or more identical substituent groups
are present then the numbers are

separated   by commas. The names of

identical substituents are not repeated,

instead prefixes such as di (for 2), tri
(for 3), tetra (for 4), penta (for 5), hexa (for
6) etc. are used. While writing the name of

the substituents in alphabetical order,

these prefixes, 
however, are not 
considered.
Thus, the following compounds are
named as:        CH3          CH3              
        CH3         CH3       
CH3-CH-CH2-CH-CH3     CH
3CCH2CHCH3                 CH32,4-Dimethylpentane        2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
              H3C H2C        CH3                           CH3CH2CHCCH2CH2CH3                  CH
33-Ethyl-4,4-dimethylheptane5.If the two substituents are found in
equivalent positions, the
 lower number is
given to the one coming first in the

alphabetical listing. Thus, the followingcompound is 3-ethyl-6-methyloctane and

not 6-ethyl-3-methyloctane.    1        2      3      4       5      6      7      8CH3 Š CH2ŠCHŠCH2ŠCH2ŠCHŠCH2 ŠCH3

                    CH2CH3             CH36.The branched alkyl groups can be named
by following the above mentioned
procedures. However, the 
carbon atom ofthe branch that attaches to the root

alkane is numbered 1 as exemplified
below.         4     3    2     1CH3ŒCHŒCH2ŒCHŒ                CH3           CH31,3-Dimethylbutyl-1.First of all, the 
longest carbon chain inthe molecule is identified
. In the example(I) given below, the longest chain has nine
carbons and it is considered as the 
parent
or root chain. Selection of parent chain as
shown in (II) is not correct because it has
only eight carbons.1     2    3     4    51     2      3      4      51        2       3      4  5       6       72.The carbon atoms of the parent chain are
numbered to identify the parent alkane and
to locate the positions of the carbon atoms
at which branching takes place due to thesubstitution of 
alkyl group in place ofhydrogen atoms. 
The numbering is donein such a way that the branched carbon
atoms get the lowest possible numbers.
Thus, the numbering in the above exampleshould be from left 
to right (
branching atcarbon atoms 2 and 6) and not from right

to left (giving numbers 4 and  8 to the
carbon atoms at which branches are
attached).1      2      3      4      5     6      7     8      9
C  C  
  C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
C  C 
 C                        C                     C
C9      8      7      6      5     4      3     2      1
C   C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
 C 
 C                     C           C 
 C3.The names of  alkyl groups attached as a
branch are 
then prefixed to the name ofthe parent alkane 
and position of thesubstituents is indicated by the
appropriate numbers. If different alkyl

groups are present, they are listed in
alphabetical order. Thus, name for the
compound shown above is: 6-ethyl-2-
methylnonane. [Note: the numbers are
335ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
The name of such branched chain alkyl group
is placed in parenthesis while naming the

compound. While writing the trivial names of
substituents™ in alphabetical order, the
prefixes iso- and neo- are considered to be

the part of the fundamental name of alkyl
group. The prefixes 
sec- and tert- are notconsidered to be the part of the fundamental

name. The use of iso and related common
prefixes for naming alkyl groups is also

allowed by the IUPAC nomenclature as long
as these are not further substituted. In multi-
substituted compounds, the following rules
may aso be remembered:
†If there happens to be two chains of equal
size, then that chain is to be selected
which contains more number of side

chains.†After selection of the chain, numbering is
to be done from the end closer to the

substituent.5-(2-Ethylbutyl)-3,3-dimethyldecane[and not 5-(2,2-Dimethylbutyl)-3-ethyldecane]5-sec-Butyl-4-isopropyldecane5-(2,2-Dimethylpropyl)nonaneProblem 12.7Structures and IUPAC names of some

hydrocarbons are given below. Explain

why the names given in the parentheses
are incorrect.
3-Ethyl-1,1-dimethylcyclohexane(not 1-ethyl-3,3-dimethylcyclohexane)2,5,6- Trimethyloctane
[and not 3,4,7-Trimethyloctane
]3-Ethyl-5-methylheptane[and not 5-Ethyl-3-methylheptane]Cyclic Compounds: A saturated
 monocycliccompound is named by prefixing ‚
cyclo™ to thecorresponding straight chain alkane. If side

chains are present, then the rules given above

are applied. Names of some cyclic compounds
are given below.
Solution(a) Lowest locant number, 2,5,6 is lower
than 3,5,7, (b) substituents are in
equivalent position; lower number is
given to the one that comes first in the
name according to alphabetical order.
12.5.3Nomenclature of Organic
Compounds having Functional
Group(s)
A functional group
, as defined earlier, is an
atom or a group of atoms bonded together in a

unique manner w
hich is usually the site of
336CHEMISTRY
chemical reactivity in an organic molecule.
Compounds having the same functional group

undergo similar reactions. For example,

CH3OH, CH
3CH2OH, and (CH
3)2CHOH Š all
having -OH functional group liberate hydrogen
on reaction with sodium metal. The presence

of functional groups enables systematisation

of organic compounds into different classes.

Examples of some functional groups with their

prefixes and suffixes al
ong with someexamples of or
ganic compounds 
possessingthese are given in Table 12.4.
First of all, the functional group present
in the molecule 
is identified which determines
the choice of appropriate suffix. 
The longestchain of carbon atoms containing the
functional group is numbered in 
such a waythat the functional group is attached at the

carbon atom possessing lowest possiblenumber in the chain. By using the suffix as
given in Table 12.4, the name of the compound
is arrived at.In the case of polyfunctional compounds,
one of the functional groups is chosen as the
principal functional group and the compound is
then named on that basis
. The r
emaining
functional groups, w
hich are subordinatefunctional groups, are 
named as substituentsusing the appropriate prefixes. The choice of
principal functional group is made on the basis
of order of preference. 
The or
der of decreasing
priority for  some functional groups is:
-COOH, ŒSO
3H, -COOR (R=alkyl group), 
COCl,-CONH2, -CN,-HC=O,  >C=O, -OH, -NH
2, >C=C<,-CC- .
The ŒR, C
6H5-, halogens (F, Cl, Br, I), ŒNO
2,alkoxy (ŒOR) etc. are always prefix

substituents. Thus, a compound containingboth an alcohol and a keto group is named
as hydroxyalkanone since the keto group is

preferred to the hydroxyl group.
For example, HOCH
2(CH2)3CH2COCH3 will be
named as 7-hydro
xyheptan-2-one and not as2-oxoheptan -7-ol. Similarly, BrCH2CH=CH2is named as 3-bromoprop-1-ene and not 1-

bromoprop-2-ene.
If more than one functional group of the
same type are present, their number is
indicated by adding di, tri, etc. before the classsuffix. In such cases the full name of the parent
alkane is written before the class suffix. For

example CH2(OH)CH2(OH) is named asethaneŒ1,2Œdiol. However, the ending Œ ne of

the parent alkane is dropped  in the case of

compounds having more than  one  double or

triple bond; for example, CH2=CH-CH=CH2 is
named as butaŒ1,3Œdiene.Problem 12.8
Write the IUPAC names of the compounds
i-iv from their given structures.
Solution†The functional group present is analcohol (OH). Hence the suffix is ‚-ol™.
†The longest chain containing -OH has
eight carbon atoms. Hence thecorresponding saturated hydrocarbon
is octane.†The -OH is on carbon atom 3. Inaddition, a methyl group is attached
at 6th carbon.
Hence, the systematic name of this
compound is 6-Methyloctan-3-ol.SolutionThe functional group present is ketone
(>C=O), hence suffix ‚-one™. Presence of

two keto groups is indicated by ‚di™,

hence suffix becomes ‚dione™. The two

keto groups are at carbons 2 and 4. The
longest chain contains 6 carbon atoms,
hence, parent hydrocarbon is hexane.

Thus, the systematic name is Hexane-

2,4-dione.
337ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
Table 12.4  Some Functional Groups and Classes of Organic Compounds

338CHEMISTRY
SolutionHere, two functional groups namely
ketone and carboxylic acid are present.
The principal functional group is the

carboxylic acid group; hence the parent

chain will be suffixed with ‚oic™ acid.

Numbering of the chain starts from

carbon of Œ COOH functional group. The

keto group in the chain at carbon 5 is

indicated by ‚oxo™. The longest chain
including the principal functional
group has 6 carbon atoms; hence the

parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The

compound is, therefore, named as

5-Oxohexanoic acid.SolutionThe two C=C functional groups are
present at carbon atoms 1 and 3, while

the CC functional group is present at
carbon 5. These groups are indicated by

suffixes ‚diene™ and ‚yne™ respectively. The

longest chain containing the functional
groups has 6 carbon atoms; hence the

parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The name

of compound, therefore, is Hexa-1,3-

dien-5-yne.Problem 12.9

Derive the structure of (i) 2-Chlorohexane,
(ii) Pent-4-en-2-ol, (iii) 3- Nitrocyclohexene,
(iv) Cyclohex-2-en-1-ol, (v) 6-Hydroxy-

heptanal.Solution(i) ‚hexane™ indicates the presence of
6 carbon atoms in the chain. The

functional group chloro is present at

carbon 2. Hence, the structure of the

compound is CH3CH2CH2CH2CH(Cl)CH3.(ii) ‚pent™ indicates that parenthydrocarbon contains 5 carbon atoms in
the chain. ‚en™ and ‚ol™ correspond to the
functional groups C=C and -OH at

carbon atoms 4 and 2 respectively. Thus,
the structure is
CH2=CHCH2CH (OH)CH3.(iii) Six membered ring containing a
carbon-carbon double bond is impl
ied bycyclohexene, which is numbered as
shown in (I). The prefix 3-nitro means that

a nitro group is present on C-3. Thus,

complete structural formula of the

compound is (II
). Double bond is suffixed
functional group whereas NO
2 is prefixed
functional group therefore double bond

gets preference over ŒNO
2 group:
(iv)  ‚1-ol™ means that a -OH group is
present at C-1. OH is suf
fixed functionalgroup and gets preference over C=C

bond. 
Thus the structure is as shownin (II):
(v) ‚heptanal™ indicates the compound to
be an aldehyde containing 7 carbon
atoms in the parent chain. The

‚6-hydroxy™ indicates that -OH group is

present at carbon 6. Thus, the structural

formula of the compound is:

CH3CH(OH)CH2CH2CH2CH2CHO. Carbon
atom of ŒCHO group is included while
numbering the carbon chain.
12.5.4Nomenclature of Substituted
Benzene CompoundsFor IUPAC nomenclature of substituted
benzene compounds, the substituent is
placed as prefix to the word 
benzene as
shown in the following examples. However,
common names (written in bracket below)
of many substituted benzene compoundsare also universally used.

339ORGANIC CHEMISTRY Œ SOME BASIC PRINCIPLES AND TECHNIQUES
2-Chloro-4-methylanisole4-Ethyl-2-methylaniline1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene
(not 4-chloro,1,3-dinitrobenzene)
If benzene ring is disubstituted, theposition of substituents is defined
by numbering the carbon atoms ofthe ring such that the substituents

are located at the lowest numbers

possible.For example, the compound(b) is

named as 1,3-dibromobenzene and not as

1,5-dibromobenzene.Substituent of the base compound isassigned number1 and then the direction of

numbering is chosen such that the next
substituent gets the lowest number. The

substituents appear in the name in
alphabetical order. Some examples are given

below.2-Chloro-1-methyl-4-nitrobenzene
(not 4-methyl-5-chloro-nitrobenzene)
3,4-DimethylphenolMethylbenzene      Methoxybenzene     Aminobenzene
    (Toluene)              (Anisole)            (Aniline)
      Nitrobenzene                  Bromobenzene
1,2-Dibromo-benzene1,3-Dibromo-benzene1,4-Dibromo-
benzene(a)(b)(c)In the trivial system of nomenclature the
terms 
ortho (o), meta (m) and para (p) are usedas prefixes to indicate the relative positions

1,2-;1,3- and 1,4- respectively. Thus,

1,3-dibromobenzene (b) is named as

m-dibromobenzene (
meta is abbreviated as
m-) and the other isomers of dibromobenzene
1,2-(a) and 1,4-(c), are named as 
ortho (or justo-) and para (or just 
p-)-dibromobenzene,respectively.
For tri - or higher substituted benzene
derivatives, these prefixes cannot be used and

the compounds are named by identifying

substituent positions on the ring by following
the lowest locant rule. In some cases, common
name of benzene derivatives is taken as  the

base compound.When a benzene ring is attached to analkane with  a  functional  group,  it  is

considered  as substituent, instead of a

parent. The name for benzene as substituent

is phenyl (C6H5-, also abbreviated as Ph).

340CHEMISTRY
different carbon skeletons, these are referred
to as chain isomers and the phenomenon is
termed as chain isomerism. For example, C
5H12represents three compounds:
IsomerismStructural isomerismStereoisomerism
ChainisomerismPositionisomerismFunctionalgroup
isomerismMetamerismGeometricalisomerismOpticalisomerism12.6 ISOMERISMThe phenomenon of existence of two or more
compounds possessing the same molecular
formula but different properties is known as

isomerism. Such compounds are called as

isomers. The following flow chart shows
different types of isomerism.
12.6.1Structural Isomerism
Compounds having the same m
olecularformula but different structures (manners in

which atoms are linked) are 
classified as
structural isomers. Some typical examples of
different types of structural isomerism are given

below:(i) Chain isomerism: When two or more
compounds have similar molecular formula but
   (a)      (b)
   (c)       (d)
Problem 12.10
Write the structural formula of:
(a)  o-Ethylanisole, (b) p-Nitroaniline,
(c)  2,3-Dibromo-1-phenylpentane,

(d) 4-Ethyl-1-fluoro-2-nitrobenzene.
Solution                                                    CH3CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3CH3−CHCH
2CH3     Pentane    Isopentane
(2-Methylbutane)                        CH3 CH3 C CH
3                 CH3 Neopentane(2,2-Dimethylpropane)
(ii) Position isomerism: When two or more
compounds differ in the position of

substituent atom or functional group on the

carbon skeleton, they are called position

isomers and this phenomenon is termed as

position isomerism. For example, the
molecular formula C
3H8O represents two
alcohols:                                         OH     CH
3CH2CH2OH       CH
3−CH-CH
3   Propan-1-ol              Propan-2-ol
(iii) Functional group isomerism:
 Two or
more compounds having the same molecular
formula but different functional groups are
called functional isomers and this
phenomenon is termed as functional group
isomerism. For example, the molecularformula C
3H6O represents an aldehyde and a
ketone:
