CHEMISTRY398UNIT 14ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRYAfter studying this unit, you will beable to•••••understand the  meaning ofenvironmental chemistry;•••••define atmospheric pollution, list
reasons for global warming. green
house effect and acid rain;•••••identify causes for ozone layerdepletion and its effects;•••••give reasons for water pollution
and know about international
standards for drinking water;•••••describe causes of soil pollution;•••••suggest and adopt strategies
for control of environmental
pollution;•••••appreciate the importance of green
chemistry in day to day life.You have already studied about environment in your earlierclasses. Environmental studies deal with the sum of all
social, economical, biological, physical and chemicalinterrelations with our surroundings. In this unit the focuswill be on environmental chemistry. Environmental
chemistry deals with the study of the origin, transport,
reactions, effects and fates of chemical species in the
environment. Let us discuss some important aspects ofenvironmental chemistry.14.1ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONEnvironmental pollution is the effect of undesirable changesin our surroundings that have harmful effects on plants,
animals and human beings. A substance, which causespollution, is known as pollutant. Pollutants can be solid,liquid or gaseous substances present in greater
concentration than in natural  abundance and are
produced due to human activities or due to natural
happenings. Do you know, an average human beingrequires nearly 12-15 times more air than the food. So,
even small amounts of pollutants in the air become
significant compared to similar levels present in the food.
Pollutants can be degradable, like discarded vegetables
which rapidly break down by natural processes. On the
other hand, pollutants which are slowly degradable, remainin the environment in an unchanged form for manydecades. For example, substances such as dichlorodi-
phenyltrichloroethane (DDT), plastic materials, heavy
metals, many chemicals, nuclear wastes etc., once released
into the environment are difficult to remove. TheseThe world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, powerwithout conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants andethical infants.
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 399pollutants cannot be degraded by naturalprocesses and are harmful to living organisms.
In the process of environmental pollution,pollutants originate from a source and gettransported by air or water or are dumped into
the soil by human beings.14.2ATMOSPHERIC 
POLLUTIONThe atmosphere that surrounds the earth isnot of the same thickness at all heights.  There
are concentric layers of air or regions and eachlayer has different density.  The lowest regionof atmosphere in which the human beings
along with other organisms live is called
troposphere. It extends up to the height of~ 10 km from sea level.  Above the troposphere,between 10 and 50 km above sea level lies
stratosphere. Troposphere is a turbulent,dusty zone containing air, much water vapour
and clouds. This is the region of strong air
movement and cloud formation. The
stratosphere, on the other hand, containsdinitrogen, dioxygen, ozone and little watervapour.Atmospheric pollution is generally studiedas tropospheric and stratospheric pollution.
The presence of ozone in the stratosphere
prevents about 99.5 per cent of the sun™s
harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiations from
reaching the earth™s surface and thereby
protecting humans and other animals from its
effect.14.2.1Tropospheric PollutionTropospheric pollution occurs due to thepresence of undesirable solid or gaseous
particles in the air. The following are the majorgaseous and particulate pollutants present inthe troposphere:1.Gaseous air pollutants: These are oxides
of sulphur, nitrogen and carbon, hydrogensulphide, hydrocarbons, ozone  and other
oxidants.2.Particulate pollutants: These are dust,
mist, fumes, smoke, smog etc.1. Gaseous air pollutants(a) Oxides of Sulphur: Oxides of sulphurare produced when sulphur containing fossilfuel is burnt. The most common species,sulphur dioxide, is a gas that is poisonous toboth animals and plants. It has been reported
that even a low concentration of sulphur
dioxide causes respiratory diseases e.g.,
asthma, bronchitis, emphysema in human
beings. Sulphur dioxide causes irritation to
the eyes, resulting in tears and redness. High
concentration of SO2 leads to stiffness of flowerbuds which eventually fall off from plants.Uncatalysed oxidation of sulphur dioxide isslow. However, the presence of particulatematter in polluted air catalyses the oxidation
of sulphur dioxide to sulphur trioxide.2SO2 (g) +O2 (g)  2SO3(g)The reaction can also be promoted byozone and hydrogen peroxide.SO2 (g) +O3 (g)  SO3(g) + O2 (g)SO2(g)  + H2O2(l)  H2SO4(aq)(b) Oxides of Nitrogen: Dinitrogen anddioxygen are the main constituents of air.
These gases do not react with each other at a
normal temperature. At high altitudes when
lightning strikes, they combine to form oxides
of nitrogen. NO2 is oxidised to nitrate ion, 3NOwhich is washed into soil, where it serves as afertilizer. In an automobile engine, (at high
temperature) when fossil fuel is burnt,dinitrogen and dioxygen combine to yieldsignificant quantities of nitric oxide (NO) and
nitrogen dioxide ( NO2 ) as given below:N2 (g) +  O2 (g)     1483K

    2NO(g)NO reacts instantly with oxygen to give NO22NO (g) +  O2 (g)  2NO2 (g)Rate of production of NO2 is faster whennitric oxide reacts with ozone in thestratosphere.NO (g) +  O3 (g)  NO2 (g) + O2 (g)The irritant red haze in the traffic and
congested places is due to oxides of nitrogen.Higher concentrations of NO2 damage theleaves of plants and retard the rate ofphotosynthesis.  Nitrogen dioxide is a lungirritant that can lead to an acute respiratorydisease in children. It is toxic to living tissuesalso. Nitrogen dioxide is also harmful tovarious textile fibres and metals.

CHEMISTRY400(c) Hydrocarbons: Hydrocarbons arecomposed of hydrogen and carbon only andare formed by incomplete combustion of fuelused in automobiles. Hydrocarbons arecarcinogenic, i.e., they cause cancer. Theyharm plants by causing ageing, breakdown of
tissues and shedding of leaves, flowers and
twigs.(d)  Oxides of Carbon
(i ) Carbon monoxide: Carbon monoxide (CO)is one of the most serious air pollutants. It is acolourless and odourless gas, highly
poisonous to living beings because of its abilityto block the delivery of oxygen to the organsand tissues. It is produced as a result of
incomplete combustion of carbon.  Carbon
monoxide is mainly released into the air by
automobile exhaust.  Other sources, which
produce CO, involve incomplete combustion
of coal, firewood, petrol, etc. The number of
vehicles has been increasing over the years all
over the world. Many vehicles are poorly
maintained and several have inadequate
pollution control equipments resulting in the
release of greater amount of carbon monoxide
and other polluting gases.  Do you know why
carbon monoxide is poisonous?  It binds to
haemoglobin to form carboxyhaemoglobin,which is about 300 times more stable than the
oxygen-haemoglobin complex. In blood, when
the concentration of carboxyhaemoglobin
reaches about 3Œ4 per cent, the oxygen
carrying capacity of blood is greatly
reduced. This oxygen deficiency, results into
headache, weak eyesight, nervousness and
cardiovascular disorder. This is the reason why
people are advised not to smoke. In pregnant
women who have the habit of smoking the
increased CO level in blood may induce
premature birth, spontaneous abortions and
deformed babies.(ii) Carbon dioxide: Carbon dioxide (CO2) isreleased into the atmosphere by respiration,burning of fossil fuels for energy, and bydecomposition of limestone during themanufacture of cement. It is also emitted
during volcanic eruptions. Carbon dioxide gas
is confined to troposphere only. Normally it
forms about 0.03 per cent by volume of theatmosphere. With the increased use of fossilfuels, a large amount of carbon dioxide getsreleased into the atmosphere. Excess of CO2in the air is removed by green plants and thismaintains an appropriate level of CO2 in theatmosphere. Green plants require CO2 forphotosynthesis and they, in turn, emit oxygen,
thus maintaining the delicate balance. As youknow, deforestation and burning of fossil fuelincreases the CO2 level and disturb the balancein the atmosphere. The increased amount ofCO2 in the air is mainly responsible for globalwarming.Global Warming and Greenhouse EffectAbout 75 %  of the solar energy reaching theearth is absorbed by the earth™s surface, whichincreases its temperature. The rest of the heatradiates back to the atmosphere. Some of theheat is trapped by gases such as carbondioxide, methane, ozone, chlorofluorocarboncompounds (CFCs) and water vapour in theatmosphere. Thus, they add to the heating ofthe atmosphere. This causes global warming.We all know that in cold places flowers,vegetables and fruits are grown in glasscovered areas called greenhouse. Do youknow that we humans also live in agreenhouse? Of course, we are not surrounded
by glass but a blanket of air called theatmosphere, which has kept the temperatureon earth constant for centuries. But it is now
undergoing change, though slowly. Just asthe glass in a greenhouse holds the sun™swarmth inside,  atmosphere traps the sun™s
heat near the earth™s surface and keeps itwarm. This is called natural greenhouseeffect because it maintains the temperatureand makes the earth perfect for life. In a
greenhouse, solar radiations pass throughthe transparent glass and heat up the soil
and the plants. The warm soil and plants emitinfrared radiations. Since glass is opaque toinfrared radiations (thermal region), it partly
reflects and partly absorbs these radiations.This mechanism keeps the energy of thesun trapped in the greenhouse. Similarly,
carbon dioxide molecules also trap heat asthey are transparent to sunlight but notto the heat radiation. If the amount of
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 401carbon dioxide crosses the delicate proportion
of 0.03 per cent, the natural greenhouse
balance may get disturbed. Carbon dioxide isthe major contributor to global warming.Besides carbon dioxide, other greenhousegases are methane, water vapour, nitrousoxide, CFCs and ozone. Methane is producednaturally when vegetation is burnt, digested
or rotted in the absence of oxygen. Large
amounts of methane are released in paddy
fields, coal mines, from rotting garbage dumps
and by fossil fuels. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
are man-made industrial chemicals used in
air conditioning etc. CFCs are also damagingthe ozone layer (Section 14.2.2). Nitrous oxideoccurs naturally in the environment. In recent
years, their quantities have increased
significantly due to the use of chemical
fertilizers and the burning of fossil fuels. If
these trends continue, the average global
temperature will increase to a level which may
lead to melting of polar ice caps and flooding
of low lying areas all over the earth. Increase
in the global temperature increases the
incidence of infectious diseases like dengue,malaria, yellow fever, sleeping sickness etc.Acid rainWe are aware that normally rain water has apH of 5.6 due to the presence of H+ ions formedby the reaction of rain water with carbonFig. 14.1  Acid depositionThink it OverWhat can we do to reduce the rate of globalwarming?If burning of fossil fuels, cutting downforests and trees add to greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere, we must find ways to
use these just efficiently and judiciously.
One of the simple things which we can doto reduce global warming is to minimise the
use of automobiles. Depending upon the
situation, one can use bicycle, public
transport system, or go for carpool. We
should plant more trees to increase the
green cover. Avoid burning of dry leaves,
wood etc.  It is illegal to smoke in publicplaces and work places, because it isharmful not only for the one who is smoking
but also for others, and therefore, we should
avoid it. Many people do not understand
the greenhouse effect and the global
warming. We can help them by sharing the
information that we have.
CHEMISTRY402dioxide present in the atmosphere.H2O (l) +  CO2 (g)      H2CO3 (aq)H2CO3 (aq)  H +(aq) + HCO3Œ(aq)When the pH of the rain water drops below5.6, it is called acid rain.Acid rain refers to the ways in which acidfrom the atmosphere is deposited on theearth™s surface. Oxides of nitrogen and
sulphur which are acidic in nature can be
blown by wind along with solid particles in theatmosphere and finally settle down either on
the ground as dry deposition or in water, fog
and snow as wet deposition. (Fig. 14.1)Acid rain is a byproduct of a variety ofhuman activities that emit the oxides of
sulphur and nitrogen in the atmosphere. As
mentioned earlier, burning of fossil fuels (which
contain sulphur and nitrogenous matter) such
as coal and oil in power stations and furnaces
or petrol and diesel in motor engines produce
sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. SO2 andNO2 after oxidation and reaction with waterare major contributors to acid rain, becausepolluted air usually contains particulatematter that catalyse the oxidation.2SO2 (g) + O2 (g) + 2H2O (l)  2H2SO4 (aq)4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)+ 2H2O (l)  4HNO3  (aq)Ammonium salts are also formed and canbe seen as an atmospheric haze (aerosol of fineparticles). Aerosol particles of oxides or
ammonium salts in rain drops result in wet-
deposition. SO2 is also absorbed directly onboth solid and liquid ground surfaces and isthus deposited as dry-deposition. Acid rain is harmful for agriculture, treesand plants as it dissolves and washes awaynutrients needed for their growth. It causes
respiratory ailments in human beings andanimals. When acid rain falls and flows asground water to reach rivers, lakes etc. it affects
plants and animal life in aquatic ecosystem. It
corrodes water pipes resulting in the leaching
of heavy metals such as iron, lead and copper
into the drinking water. Acid rain damages
buildings and other structures made of stone
or metal. The Taj Mahal in India has beenaffected by acid rain.Activity 1You can collect samples of water fromnearby places and record their pH values.
Discuss your results in the class. Let usdiscuss how we can help to reduce theformation of acid rain.This can be done by reducing theemission of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen
dioxide in the atmosphere. We should useless vehicles driven by fossil fuels; use less
sulphur content fossil fuels for  power
plants and industries. We should use
natural gas which is a better fuel than coal
or use coal with less sulphur content.
Catalytic converters must be used in carsto reduce the effect of exhaust fumes onthe atmosphere. The main component of
the converter is a ceramic honeycomb
coated with precious metals Š Pd, Pt and
Rh. The exhaust gases containing unburnt
fuel, CO and NOx, when pass through theconverter at 573 K, are converted into CO2and N2. We can also reduce the acidity ofthe soil by adding powdered limestone toneutralise the acidity of the soil. Manypeople do not know of acid rain and itsharmful effects. We can make them aware
by passing on this information and save
the Nature.Taj Mahal and Acid RainThe air around the city of Agra, where theTaj Mahal is located, contains fairly high
levels of sulphur and nitrogen oxides. It ismainly due to a large number of industriesand power plants around the area. Use of
poor quality of coal, kerosene and firewood
as fuel for domestic purposes add up to
this problem.  The resulting acid rainreacts with marble, CaCO3 of Taj Mahal(CaCO3 +H2SO4   CaSO4 + H2O+ CO2)causing damage to this wonderfulmonument that has attracted people fromaround the world. As a result, themonument is being slowly disfigured and
the marble is getting discoloured and
lustreless. The Government of India
announced an action plan in early 1995to prevent the disfiguring of this historical
monument. Mathura refinery has already
taken suitable measures to check the
emission of toxic gases.
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 4032. Particulate PollutantsParticulates pollutants are the minute solidparticles or liquid droplets in air. These arepresent in vehicle emissions, smoke particlesfrom fires, dust particles and ash from
industries. Particulates in the atmospheremay be viable or non-viable. The viableparticulates e.g., bacteria, fungi, moulds,algae etc., are minute living organisms that are
dispersed in the atmosphere. Human beingsare allergic to some of the fungi found in air.They can also cause plant diseases.Non-viable particulates may be classifiedaccording to their nature and size as follows:(a) Smoke particulates consist of solid ormixture of solid and liquid particles formedduring combustion of organic matter.Examples are cigarette smoke, smoke from
burning of fossil fuel, garbage and dryleaves, oil smoke etc.(b)Dust is composed of fine solid particles
(over 1µm in diameter), produced duringcrushing, grinding and attribution of solidmaterials. Sand from sand blasting, saw
dust from wood works, pulverized coal,cement and fly ash from factories, duststorms etc., are some typical examples of
this type of particulate emission.(c)Mists are produced by particles of spray
liquids and by condensation of vapours in
air. Examples are sulphuric acid mist andherbicides and insecticides that miss theirtargets and travel through air  and form
mists.(d)Fumes are generally obtained by the
condensation of vapours during
sublimation, distillation, boiling andseveral other chemical reactions. Generally,organic solvents, metals and metallic
oxides form fume particles.The effect of particulate pollutants arelargely dependent on the particle size. Air-borne particles such as dust, fumes, mist etc.,are dangerous for human health. Particulatepollutants bigger than 5 microns are likely to
lodge in the nasal passage, whereas particlesof about 10 micron enter into lungs easily.Lead used to be a major air pollutantemitted by vehicles. Leaded petrol used to be
the primary source of air-borne lead emissionin Indian cities. This problem has now been
overcome by using unleaded petrol in most ofthe cities in India. Lead interferes with thedevelopment and maturation of red blood cells.SmogThe word smog is derived from smoke and fog.This is the most common example of airpollution that occurs in many citiesthroughout the world. There are two types of
smog:(a)Classical smog occurs in cool humid
climate. It is a mixture of smoke, fog andsulphur dioxide. Chemically it is areducing mixture and so it is also calledas reducing smog.(b)Photochemical smog occurs in warm, dry
and sunny climate. The main componentsof the photochemical smog result from the
action of sunlight on unsaturatedhydrocarbons and nitrogen oxidesproduced by automobiles and factories.
Photochemical smog has highconcentration of oxidising agents and is,therefore, called as oxidising smog.Formation of photochemical smogWhen fossil fuels are burnt, a variety ofpollutants are emitted into the earth™sThis plan aims at clearing the air inthe ‚Taj Trapezium™Œ an area that includesthe towns of Agra, Firozabad, Mathura andBharatpur. Under this plan more than2000 polluting industries lying inside the
trapezium would switch over to the use of
natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas
instead of coal or oil. A new natural gaspipeline would bring more than half a
million cubic metres of natural gas a day
to this area.  People living in the city will
also be encouraged to use liquefied
petroleum gas in place of coal, kerosene or
firewood. Vehicles plying on highways inthe vicinity of Taj would be encouraged touse low sulphur content diesel.
CHEMISTRY404troposphere. Two of the pollutants that areemitted are hydrocarbons (unburnt fuels) and
nitric oxide (NO). When these pollutants buildup to sufficiently high levels, a chain reactionoccurs from their interaction with sunlight in
which NO is converted into nitrogen dioxide(NO2). This NO2 in turn absorbs energy fromsunlight and breaks up into nitric oxide andfree oxygen atom (Fig. 14.2).NO2(g)       NO(g)   +   O(g)(i)
Oxygen atoms are very reactive andcombine with the O2 in air to produce ozone.O(g) + O2 (g)  O3 (g)(ii)
The ozone formed in the above reaction (ii)reacts rapidly with the NO(g) formed in thereaction (i) to regenerate NO2. NO2 is a browngas and at sufficiently high levels cancontribute to haze.NO (g) + O3 (g)  NO2 (g) + O2 (g)(iii)
Ozone is a toxic gas and both NO2  and O3are strong oxidising agents and can react withthe unburnt hydrocarbons in the polluted airto produce chemicals such as formaldehyde,acrolein and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN).3CH4   +  2O
3    3CH2 = O    + 3H2O                              FormaldehydeCH2=CHCH=O              CH3COONO2          Acrolein                                                                                        O          Peroxyacetyl nitrate  (PAN)Effects of photochemical smogThe common components of photochemicalsmog are ozone, nitric oxide, acrolein,formaldehyde and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN).
Photochemical smog causes serious healthproblems. Both ozone and PAN act as powerfuleye irritants. Ozone and nitric oxide irritate the
nose and throat and their high concentration
causes headache, chest pain, dryness of the
throat, cough and difficulty in breathing.
Photochemical smog leads to cracking of
rubber and extensive damage to plant life. Italso causes corrosion of metals, stones,
building materials, rubber and paintedsurfaces.Fig. 14.2  Photochemical smog occurs where sunlight acts on vehicle pollutants.
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 405How can photochemical smog becontrolled ?Many techniques are used to control or reducethe formation of photochemical smog. If we
control the primary precursors of
photochemical smog, such as NO2 andhydrocarbons, the secondary precursors suchas ozone and PAN, the photochemical smogwill automatically be reduced. Usually catalyticconverters are used in the automobiles, which
prevent the release of nitrogen oxide and
hydrocarbons to the atmosphere.  Certain
plants e.g., Pinus, Juniparus, Quercus, Pyrusand Vitis can metabolise nitrogen oxide and
therefore, their plantation could help in this
matter.14.2.2Stratospheric PollutionFormation and Breakdown of OzoneThe upper stratosphere consists ofconsiderable amount of ozone (O3), whichprotects us from the harmful ultraviolet (UV)
radiations ( 255 nm) coming from the sun.These radiations cause skin cancer(melanoma) in humans. Therefore, it is
important to maintain the ozone shield.Ozone in the stratosphere is a product ofUV radiations acting on dioxygen (O2)molecules. The UV radiations split apartmolecular oxygen into free oxygen (O) atoms.These oxygen atoms combine with themolecular oxygen to form ozone.O2 (g)       O(g)    +   O(g)O(g)    +    O2 (g)       O3 (g)Ozone is thermodynamically unstable anddecomposes to molecular oxygen. Thus, adynamic equilibrium exists between theproduction and decomposition of ozonemolecules. In recent years, there have been
reports of the depletion of this protective ozonelayer because of the presence of certainchemicals in the stratosphere. The main
reason of ozone layer depletion is believed tobe the release of chlorofluorocarboncompounds (CFCs), also known as freons.
These compounds are nonreactive, nonflammable, non toxic organic molecules andtherefore used in refrigerators, air conditioners,in the production of plastic foam and by theelectronic industry for cleaning computer
parts etc. Once CFCs are released in the
atmosphere, they mix with the normal
atmospheric gases and eventually reach the
stratosphere. In stratosphere, they get broken
down by powerful UV radiations, releasing
chlorine free  radical.CF2Cl2 (g)         (g)  + CF2Cl (g)(i)
The chlorine radical then react withstratospheric ozone to form chlorine monoxideradicals and molecular oxygen.Cl (g) + O3 (g)  ClO (g) + O2 (g)(ii)
Reaction of chlorine monoxide radical withatomic oxygen produces more chlorine
radicals.ClO (g) + O (g)  Cl (g) + O2 (g)(iii)
The chlorine radicals are continuouslyregenerated and cause the breakdown ofozone. Thus, CFCs are transporting agents forcontinuously generating chlorine radicals into
the stratosphere and damaging the ozone layer.The Ozone HoleIn 1980s atmospheric scientists working inAntarctica reported about depletion of ozone
layer commonly known as ozone hole over theSouth Pole. It was found that a unique set ofconditions was responsible for the ozone hole.
In summer season, nitrogen dioxide and
methane react with chlorine monoxide
(reaction iv) and chlorine atoms (reaction v)forming chlorine sinks, preventing much ozone
depletion, whereas in winter, special type of
clouds called polar stratospheric clouds are
formed over Antarctica. These polar
stratospheric clouds provide surface on which
chlorine nitrate formed (reaction iv) getshydrolysed to form hypochlorous acid(reaction (vi)). It also reacts with hydrogen
chloride produced as per reaction (v) to give
molecular chlorine.ClO (g)   +   NO2 (g)  ClONO2(g)(iv)
Cl (g)   +   CH4 (g)  CH3(g) + HCl(g)(v)
ClONO2(g) + H2O (g)  HOCl (g) + HNO3 (g)  (vi)ClONO2(g) + HCl (g)  Cl2 (g) + HNO3 (g)    (vii)
CHEMISTRY406When sunlight returns to the Antarctica inthe spring, the sun™s warmth breaks up theclouds and HOCl and Cl2 are photolysed bysunlight, as given in reactions (viii) and (ix).HOCl (g) h OH (g)  +  Cl(g)(viii)
Cl2 (g) h    2Cl (g)(ix)
The chlorine radicals thus formed, initiatethe chain reaction for ozone depletion asdescribed earlier.Effects of Depletion of the Ozone LayerWith the depletion of ozone layer, more UVradiation filters into troposphere. UV
radiations lead to ageing of skin, cataract,sunburn, skin cancer, killing of manyphytoplanktons, damage to fish productivity
etc. It has also been reported that plant
proteins get easily affected by UV radiations
which leads to the harmful mutation of cells.It also  increases evaporation of surface water
through the stomata of the leaves and
decreases the moisture content of the soil.
Increase  in UV radiations damage paints and
fibres, causing them to fade faster.14.3WATER POLLUTION
Water is essential for life. Without water therewould be no life. We usually take water as
granted for its purity, but we must ensure thequality of water. Pollution of water originatesfrom human activities. Through different
paths, pollution reaches surface or ground
water.  Easily identified source or place of
pollution is called as point source. e.g.,municipal and industrial discharge pipeswhere pollutants enter the water-source. Non
point sources of pollution are those where a
source of pollution cannot be easily identified,
e.g., agricultural run off (from farm, animals
and crop-lands), acid rain, storm-water
drainage (from streets, parking lots and lawns),
etc. Table 14.1 lists the major water pollutants
and their sources.14.3.1Causes of Water Pollution(i) Pathogens: The most serious waterpollutants are the disease causing agentscalled pathogens. Pathogens include bacteriaand other organisms that enter water from
domestic sewage and animal excreta. Humanexcreta contain bacteria such as Escherichiacoli and Streptococcus faecalis which causegastrointestinal diseases.(ii) Organic wastes: The other major waterpollutant is organic matter such asleaves, grass, trash etc. They pollute water asa consequence of run off. Excessivephytoplankton  growth within  water  is also acause of water pollution. These wastes are
biodegradable.The large population of bacteriadecomposes organic matter present in water.
They consume oxygen dissolved in water. Theamount of oxygen that water can hold in the
solution is limited. In cold water, dissolved
oxygen (DO) can reach a concentration up to
10 ppm (parts per million), whereas oxygen in
air is about 200,000 ppm. That is why even a
moderate amount of organic matter when
decomposes in water can deplete the water of
its dissolved oxygen. The concentration ofTable 14.1  Major Water PollutantsPollutantSourceMicro-organismsDomestic sewageOrganic wastesDomestic sewage, animal excreta and waste, decaying animalsand plants, discharge from food processing factories.Plant nutrientsChemcial fertilizers
Toxic heavy metalsI
ndustries and chemical factoriesSedimentsErosion of soil by agriculture and strip miningPesticidesChemicals used for killing insects, fungi and weedsRadioactive substancesMining of uranium containing mineralsHeatWater used for cooling in industries
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 407dissolved oxygen in water is very importantfor aquatic life . If the concentration of dissolved
oxygen of water is below 6 ppm, the growth offish gets inhibited. Oxygen reaches watereither through atmosphere or from the process
of photosynthesis carried out by many
aquatic green plants during day light.However, during night, photosynthesis stopsbut the plants continue to respire, resulting
in reduction of dissolved oxygen. The
dissolved oxygen is also used by
microorganisms to oxidise organic matter.If too much of organic matter is added towater, all the available oxygen is used up.  This
causes oxygen dependent aquatic life to die.
Thus, anaerobic bacteria (which do not require
oxygen) begin to break down the organic waste
and produce chemicals that have a foul smell
and are harmful to human health. Aerobic
(oxygen requiring) bacteria degrade these
organic wastes and  keep the water depleted
in dissolved oxygen.Thus, the amount of oxygen required bybacteria to break down the organic matter
present in a certain volume of a sample of
water, is called Biochemical Oxygen Demand(BOD). The amount of BOD in the water is ameasure of the amount of organic material in
the water, in terms of how much oxygen will
be required to break it down biologically. Clean
water would have BOD value of less than
5 ppm whereas highly polluted water could
have a BOD value of 17 ppm or more.(iii) Chemical Pollutants: As we know thatwater is an excellent solvent, water solubleinorganic chemicals that include heavy metals
such as cadmium, mercury, nickel etc
constitute an important class of pollutants. All
these metals are dangerous to humans
because our body cannot excrete them. Over
the time, it crosses the tolerance limit. These
metals then can damage kidneys, central
nervous system, liver etc. Acids (like sulphuric
acid) from mine drainage and salts from many
different sources including raw salt used to
melt snow and ice in the colder climates
(sodium and calcium chloride)  are water
soluble chemical pollutants.The organic chemicals are another groupof substances that are found in polluted water.Petroleum products pollute many sources ofwater e.g., major oil spills in oceans.  Otherorganic substances with serious impacts arethe pesticides that drift down from sprays or
runoff from lands. Various industrialchemicals like polychlorinated biphenyls,(PCBs)  which are used as cleansing solvent,
detergents and fertilizers add to the list ofwater pollutants. PCBs are suspected to becarcinogenic. Nowadays most of the detergents
available are biodegradable. However, their usecan create other problems. The bacteriaresponsible for degrading biodegradabledetergent feed on it and grow rapidly. Whilegrowing, they may use up all the oxygendissolved in water. The lack of oxygen kills all
other forms of aquatic life such as fish andplants. Fertilizers contain phosphates asadditives. The addition of phosphates in water
enhances algae growth. Such profuse growthof algae, covers the water surface and reducesthe oxygen concentration in water. This leadsto anaerobic conditions, commonly withaccumulation of abnoxious decay and animal
death.  Thus, bloom-infested water inhibits thegrowth of other living organisms in thewater body. This process in which nutrient
enriched water bodies  support a dense plantpopulation, which kills animal life by deprivingit of oxygen and results in subsequent loss of
biodiversity is known as Eutrophication.14.3.2International Standards forDrinking WaterThe International Standards for drinking water
are given below and they must be followed.Fluoride: For drinking purposes, water
should be tested for fluoride ion concentration.Its deficiency in drinking water is harmful to
man and causes diseases such as tooth decay
etc. Soluble fluoride is often added to drinking
water to bring its concentration upto 1 ppm
or 1 mg dmŒ3. The FŒ ions make the enamel onteeth much harder by convertinghydroxyapatite, [3(Ca3(PO4)2.Ca(OH)2], theenamel on the surface of the teeth, into much
harder fluorapatite, [3(Ca3(PO4)2.CaF2].
CHEMISTRY408However, FŒ ion concentration above 2 ppmcauses brown mottling of teeth.  At the sametime, excess fluoride (over 10 ppm) causesharmful effect to bones and teeth, as reportedfrom some parts of Rajasthan.Lead: Drinking water gets contaminated withlead when lead pipes are used fortransportation of water. The prescribed upper
limit concentration of lead in drinking water
is about 50 ppb. Lead can damage kidney,
liver, reproductive system etc.Sulphate: Excessive sulphate (>500 ppm) indrinking water causes laxative effect, otherwiseat moderate levels it is harmless.Nitrate: The maximum limit of nitrate indrinking water is 50 ppm. Excess nitrate indrinking water can cause disease such as
methemoglobinemia (‚blue baby™ syndrome).Other metals: The maximum concentrationof some common metals recommended indrinking water are given in Table 14.2.pollution levels. Ensure that appropriateaction is taken. You can write to the press
also. Do not dump waste  into ahousehold or industrial drain which canenter directly to any water body, such as,
river, pond, stream or lake. Use compost
instead of chemical fertilizers in gardens.
Avoid the use of pesticides  like DDT,malathion etc., at home and try to use
dried neem leaves to help keep insects
away. Add a few crystals of potassium
permanganate (KMnO4) or bleachingpowder to the water tank of your house.14.4SOIL POLLUTIONIndia being an agriculture based economygives high priority to agriculture, fisheries and
livestock development. The surplusproduction is stored by governmental andnon-governmental organisations for the lean
season.  The food loss during the storage also
needs special attention. Have you ever seen the
damages caused to the crops, food items byinsects, rodents, weeds and crop diseases etc?
How can we protect them? You are acquainted
with some insecticides and pesticides for
protection of our crops. However, these
insecticides, pesticides and herbicides cause
soil pollution. Hence, there is a need for theirjudicious use.14.4.1PesticidesPrior to World War II, many naturallyoccurring chemicals such as nicotine (by
planting tobacco plants in the crop field), wereused as pest controlling substance for majorcrops in agricultural practices.During World War II, DDT was found to beof great use in the control of malaria and otherinsect-borne diseases. Therefore, after the war,
DDT was put to use in agriculture to control
the damages caused by insects, rodents, weeds
and various crop diseases. However, due to
adverse effects, its use has been banned in
India.Pesticides are basically synthetic toxicchemicals with ecological repercussions.  The
repeated use of the same or similar pesticides
give rise to pests that are resistant to thatMetalMaximum concentration
(ppm or mg dmŒ3 )Fe0.2
Mn0.05

Al0.2

Cu3.0

Zn5.0
Cd0.005
Table 14.2Maximum Prescribed Concen-tration of Some Metals in
Drinking Water.Activity 2You can visit local water sources and
observe if the river/lake/tank/pond areunpolluted/slightly polluted/ moderately
polluted or severely polluted by looking
at water or by checking pH of water.
Document the name of the river and the
nearby urban or industrial site fromwhere the pollution is generated. Inform
about this to Pollution Control Board™s
office set up by Government to measure
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY 409group of pesticides thus making the pesticidesineffective.  Therefore, as insect resistance of
DDT increased, other organic toxins such asAldrin and Dieldrin were introduced in themarket by pesticide industry.  Most of the
organic toxins are water insoluble and non-
biodegradable.  These high persistent toxins
are, therefore, transferred from lower trophiclevel to higher trophic level through food chain
(Fig.14.3). Over the time, the concentration of
toxins in higher animals reach a level which
causes serious metabolic and physiological
disorders.Fig. 14.3At each trophic level, the pollutantgets 10 times concentrated.sodium chlorate (NaClO3), sodium arsinite(Na3AsO3) and many others.  During the firsthalf of the last century, the shift from
mechanical to chemical weed control hadprovided the industry with flourishingeconomic market. But one must remember that
these are also not environment friendly.Most herbicides are toxic to mammals butare not as persistent as organo-chlorides.These chemicals decompose in a few months.
Like organo-chlorides, these too become
concentrated in the food web.  Some herbicides
cause birth defects.  Studies show that corn-
fields sprayed with herbicides are more prone
to insect attack and plant disease than fieldsthat are weeded manually.Pesticides and herbicides represent only avery small portion of widespread chemicalpollution. A large number of other compounds
that are used regularly in chemical and
industrial processes for manufacturing
activities are finally released in the atmosphere
in one or other form.14.5INDUSTRIAL WASTEIndustrial solid wastes are also sorted out asbiodegradable and non-degradable wastes.
Biodegradable wastes are generated by cottonmills, food processing units, paper mills, andtextile factories.Non-biodegradable wastes are generatedby thermal power plants which produce flyash; integrated iron and steel plants whichproduce blast furnace slag and steel meltingslag. Industries manufacturing aluminium,
zinc and copper produce mud and tailings.Fertilizer industries produce gypsum.Hazardous wastes such as inflammables,composite explosives or highly reactivesubstances are produced by industriesdealing in metals, chemicals, drugs, pharma-
ceuticals, dyes, pesticides, rubber goods etc.The disposal of non-degradable industrialsolid wastes, if not done by a proper and
suitable method, may cause serious threat tothe environment.  New innovations have led todifferent uses of waste material.  Nowadays,fly ash and slag from the steel industry areutilised by the cement industry. LargeIn response to high persistence ofchlorinated organic toxins, a new series of lesspersistent or more bio-degradable productscalled organo-phosphates and carbamateshave been introduced in the market. But these
chemicals are severe nerve toxins and hence
more harmful to humans. As a result, there
are reports of some pesticides related deathsof agricultural field workers.  Insects have
become resistant to these insecticides also.  The
insecticide industry is engaged in developing
new groups of insecticides.  But one has to
think, is this the only solution to pest menace?These days, the pesticide industry hasshifted its attention to herbicides such as
CHEMISTRY410quantities of toxic wastes are usually destroyedby controlled incineration, whereas small
quantities are burnt along with factorygarbage in open bins.  Moreover, solid wastesif not managed effectively, affect the
components of the environment.household discards, there are medical,agricultural, industrial and mining wastes. Theimproper disposal of wastes is one of the majorcauses of environmental degradation.
Therefore, the management of wastes is of
utmost importance.Collection and DisposalDomestic wastes are collected in small bins,which are then transferred to community bins
by private or municipal workers.  From thesecommunity bins, these are collected andcarried to the disposable site.  At the site,
garbage is sorted out and separated into
biodegradable and non-biodegradable
materials. Non-biodegradable materials suchas plastic, glass, metal scraps etc. are sent for
recycling.  Biodegradable wastes are deposited
in land fills and are converted into compost. The waste if not collected in garbage bins,finds its way into the sewers. Some of it is eaten
by cattle. Non-biodegradable wastes like
polythene bag, metal scraps, etc. choke the
sewers and cause inconvenience. Polythene
bags, if swallowed by cattle can cost their lives
also.As a normal practice, therefore, alldomestic wastes should be properly collected
and disposed. The poor management causes
health problems leading to epidemics due to
contamination of ground water. It is specially
hazardous for those who are in direct contact
with the waste such as rag pickers and workers
involved in waste disposal, as they are the ones
who handle waste materials mostly without
protective device such as gloves or water proofboots and gas masks. What can you do for
them?14.7GREEN CHEMISTRY14.7.1IntroductionIt is well known fact that self-sufficiency in foodhas been achieved in India since late 20thcentury by using fertilizers and pesticides andexploring improved methods of farming, goodquality seeds, irrigation etc.  But over-
exploitation of soil and excessive use offertilizers and pesticides have resulted in thedeterioration of soil, water and air.
Do you know about waste recycling?•••••Fuel obtained from plastic waste hashigh octane rating. It contains no leadand is known as ﬁgreen fuelﬂ.•••••Due to recent developments made inchemical and textile industries, clothes
will be made from recycled plastic
waste. These will be available soon in
the global textile market.•••••In India, our cities and towns face
endless hours of power cut. We can also
see piles of rotting garbage here and
there. There is a good news that we can
get rid from both these problemssimultaneously. Technology has now
been developed to produce electricity
from the garbage. A pilot plant has been
set up, where after removing ferrous
metals, plastic, glass, paper etc. from
garbage, it is mixed with water. It is then
cultured with bacterial species for
producing methane, commonly known
as biogas. The remaining product is
used as manure and biogas is used to
produce electricity.14.6STRATEGIES TO CONTROLENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTIONAfter studying air, water, soil and industrialwaste pollution in this unit, by now you musthave started feeling the need of controllingenvironmental pollution: How can you saveyour immediate environment? Think of thesteps/activities, which you would like toundertake for controlling air, water, soil andindustrial waste pollution in yourneighbourhood. Here, an idea about thestrategies for the management of waste is given.14.6.1Waste Management
Solid waste is not the only waste, which yousee in your household garbage box.  Besides
