ELECTRONICSPREADSHEETIntroductionAfter completing this Chapter, the
student will be able to:Łcreate, save and open a sheet in
a spreadsheet,Łenter dataŒtext, numbers and

formulas in a sheet,Łnavigate within a sheet and alsobetween different sheets of a
workbook,
Łinsert and delete cells, rows and
columns in a sheet,Łselect, copy, paste and delete cell
data within a worksheet,Łuse various formulas and inbuilt
functions provided in thespreadsheet,Łcreate error free sheets usingspecial tools like spell check and
auto correct,
Łsetup the page and margins of
the worksheets so as to print it in
a paper of desired  choice,Łformat the data in the worksheetentirely or selectively,Łdefine and apply styles andŁenhance worksheets using
charts.4In our daily life, we may have come across a list ofitems in tabular form several times. For example,
the shopping bills, the school annual report card,or the cricket match scorecard. These tables withrows and columns are called spreadsheets. If wehave to tabulate and analyse the data for the
Indian team™s performance in a cricket series andsubmit a project as part of our  course evaluation,we will perhaps take a chart paper and design theproject, write a report and submit it. That™s the
way we have done it all along. The project may
completely cover all aspects of the series but we
are not happy with it. This is because the projectreport is staticŒwe cannot make dynamic analysis
using this paper report. How do we then get
attention of our audience? Welcome to the world
of electronic spreadsheets, where we can do allthese, and much more. Let us see how.ObjectivesﬁIt™s a humongous time saver! I did [depreciationcalculations] with spreadsheets before, but
because of tax laws changing so much, you haveto keep track of ACE (adjusted current earnings),AMT (alternative minimum tax) and four or fiveother methods of reporting. And updating would
take four or five hours. Now, with one button,the information just rolls over.ﬂTerry RogersConsultant, Datacentrik Solutions, Vancouver.

