FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005 recommends thatchildren™s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning whichcontinues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school,home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of
NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantlyfurther in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principalsand teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating
creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required numbers of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.NCFŒ2005 envisages an increase in the optional number of subjectsavailable for students of Classes XI and XII. This textbook marks an attempt
in this direction. Its subject matter concerns how we work with computers,rather than about how computers works. It is expected that this textbook
will be used with the help of methods of teaching which might enhance
the flexible and participatory nature of new communication technology.NCERT appreciate the hard work done by the Textbook DevelopmentCommittee and its Chief Advisor, Professor M.M. Pant, Former Pro-Vice Chancellor,
(iv)Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi. We are indebted to theinstitutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the membersof the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondaryand Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their
valuable time and contribution.As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuousimprovement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes commentsand suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and
refinement.DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of EducationalMay 2008Research and Training

Computers have become a way of life in the present day world. That everyoneshould be educated about the implications of this technology is the need
of the hour. Till now NCERT has not proposed a course or brought out atextbook in this area. The course outlined for this textbook is an attemptto design a generally friendly course that would not only be contemporary
but also leave sufficient scope for expansion into unknown realms of
computer activity that may emerge in future.The National Curriculum Framework 2005 recommends that theoreticalcomponent of Higher Secondary stage should emphasise on problem solvingmethods and that the awareness of historical development of key concepts
be judiciously integrated into the content of a subject. It also recommends
that given the pervasive impact of computer and communication
technologies (CCT), a course related to this should address this
infrastructure challenge seriously and explore viable and innovative
alternatives with regard to hardware, software and connectivity
technologies appropriate for rural and urban Indian schools.NCF 2005 states that the book should act as an instrument for achievingsocial change in order to reduce the divide based on economic class, gender,
caste, religion and region. NCF also speaks about tremendous effectiveness
of the computer and computing technology in shaping modern society
which has created the need for an educated public that can utilise such
technology most effectively for the betterment of society and humankind.
This book is aligned to these broad guidelines of NCF.Presumably, this would be a coveted book for ﬁeverybodyﬂ, irrespectiveof any particular stream of higher secondary stage, for it deals with the
real challenges that the discipline is trying to solve. It emphasisesdevelopment of problem-solving and, equally important, problem-
formulating skills. It reduces the importance of technology and underscores
the need for learning skills to manipulate the technology.  It focuses on
some of the real problems that come up with the expansion of the technology
Œsecurity, piracy and digital identity. Above all, the course focuses as
PREFACE
