162INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 After studying this chapter, the learners will
“understand the concept of environment
analyse the causes and effects of ‚environmental degradation™ and ‚resourcedepletion™understand the nature of environmental challenges facing Indiarelate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable
development.ENVIRONMENT ANDSUSTAINABLE
 DEVELOPMENT9
163ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT9.1 INTRODUCTIONIn the earlier chapters we havediscussed the main economic issues
faced by the Indian economy. The

economic development that we have
achieved so far has come at a very heavy
priceŠat the cost of environmental

quality. As we step into an era of
globalisation that promises higher

economic growth, we have to bear in
mind the adverse consequences of the

past development path on our

environment and consciously choose a
path of sustainable development. To
understand the unsustainable path of
development that we have taken and

the challenges of sustainable
development, we have to first
understand the significance and
contribution of environment to
economic development. With this in

mind, this chapter is divided into three
sections. The first part deals with the
functions and role of environment. The
second section discusses the state of
India™s environment and the third
section deals with steps and strategies
to achieve sustainable development.9.2  E
NVIRONMENT Š D
EFINITION ANDFUNCTIONSEnvironment is defined as the total
planetary inheritance and the totality
of all resources. It includes all the bioticand abiotic factors that influence eachother. While all living elementsŠthe

birds, animals and plants, forests,

fisheries etc.Šare biotic elements,

abiotic elements include air, water, land

etc. Rocks and sunlight are all
examples of abiotic elements of the
environment. A st
udy of the 
environmentthen calls for a study of the inter-

relationship between these biotic and
abiotic components of the environment.Functions of the Environment: Theenvironment performs four vital
functions (i) it supplies resources:
resources here include both renewable
and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are those which
can be used without the possibility of
the resource becoming depleted or
exhausted. That is, a continuous
supply of the resource remains
available. Examples of renewable
resources are the trees in the forests and
the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable
resources, on the other hand, are those
which get exhausted with extraction
and use,  for example, fossil fuel (ii) it

assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by
providing genetic and bio diversity and
(iv) it also provides aesthetic services
like scenery etc.The environment is able to performthese functions without any in
terruptionas long as the demand on theseThe environment, left to itself, can continue to support life for millions of

years. The single most unstable and potentially disruptive element in the
scheme is the human species. Human beings, with modern technology, have
the capacity to bring about, intentionally or unintentionally, far-reaching

and irreversible changes in the enviornment.
Anonymous
164INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Work These Out
Why has water become an economic commodity? Discuss.
Fill in the following table with some common types of diseases and illnessesthat are caused due to air, water and noise pollution.
functions is within its 
carryingcapacity. This implies that the resourceextraction is not above the rate ofregeneration of the resource and the
wastes generated are within the

assimilating capacity of the
environment. When this is not so, the
environment fails to perform its third
and vital function of life sustenance andthis results in anenvironmental crisis. This
is the situation today
all over the world. The
rising population of the
developing countries and
the affluent consumption

and production standards
of the developed world have

placed a huge stress on the
environment in terms of its
first two functions. Many

resources have become
extinct and the wastes
generated are beyond the
absorptive capacity of the
environment. Absorptivecapacity means the abilityof the environment toabsorb degradation. The result Š we
are today at the threshold of
environmental crisis. The past
development has polluted and dried up
rivers and other aquifers making water
an economic good. Besides, the
intensive and extensive extraction of
both renewable and non-renewable
resources has exhausted some of theseAir PollutionWater 
PollutionNoise PollutionAsthmaCholera
Fig. 9.1 Water bodies: small, snow-fed Himalayan streams are
the few fresh-water sources that remain unpolluted.
165ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTvital resources and we are compelledto spend huge amounts on technology
and research to explore new resources.
Added to these are the health costs of
degraded environmental quality Š
decline in air and water quality (seventy
per cent of water in India is polluted)
have resulted in increased incidence of
respiratory  and water-borne diseases.

Hence the expenditure on health is also
rising. To m
ake matters worse, globalenvironmental issues such as globalwarming and ozone depletion
 also
contribute to increased financial
commitments for the government.Box 9.1: Global Warming
Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth™s
lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the
Industrial Revolution
. Much of the recent observed and projected globalwarming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in
 carbondioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of 
fossil fuels and
deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that
have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes
will make our planet™s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of

carbon dioxide and CH4 have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent
respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century,
the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1°F (0.6°C) and sea level has
risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are

melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding;
disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of
species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an
increased incidence of tropical diseases.Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning
of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous

oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle

production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use
of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in
1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which
called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations. Source: www.wikipedia.orgThus, it is clear that the 
opportunitycosts of negative environmental
impacts are high.The biggest question that arises is:are environmental problems new to this
century? If so, why? The answer to this
question requires some elaboration. In
the early days when civilisation just

began, or before this phenomenal

increase in population, and before
countries took to industrialisation, the
demand for environmental resources

and services was much less than their
supply. This meant that pollution was
within the absorptive capacity of the
166INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box 9.2: Ozone DepletionOzone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozonein the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levelsof chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these
compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in air-

conditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and
bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion

of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes

damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer
in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other
aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A
reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from
1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths ofultraviolet light from passing through the 
Earth™s atmosphere, observed andprojected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to
the adoption of the 
Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon
tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine
compounds known as halons.Source: www.ceu.hu
environment and the rate of resourceextraction was less than the rate of
regeneration of these resources. Hence
environmental problems did not arise.But with population explosion and withthe advent of industrial revolution
to meet the growing needs of the
expanding population, thingschanged. The result was that the
demand for resources for both
production and consumption
went beyond the rate of

regeneration of the resources; the
pressure on the absorptive
capacity of the environment
increased tremendously Š this
trend continues even today. Thus
what has happened is a reversal

of supply-demand relationship
for environmental quality Š we
are now faced with increased

demand for environmental
resources and services but their

supply is limited due to overuseFig. 9.2Damodar Valley is one of  India™s most
industrialised regions. Pollutants from the  heavy

industries along the banks of the Damodar river
are converting it into an ecological disaster
167ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTand misuse. Hencethe environmental
issues of waste
generation and
pollution have
become critical
today.9.3 STATE OF INDIA™SENVIRONMENTIndia has abundant
natural resources interms of rich quality
of soil, hundreds of

rivers and 
tributaries,lush green forests,
plenty of mineral
deposits beneath the land surface, vast
stretch of the 
Indian Ocean, ranges ofmountains, etc. The black soil of the
Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable
for cultivation of cotton, leading toconcentration of textile industries in this
region. The Indo-Gangetic plains Š
spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay
of Bengal Š are one of the most fertile,
intensively cultivated and denselypopulated regions in the world. India™sforests, though unevenly distributed,

provide green cover for a majority of its

population and natural cover for its

wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal
and natural gas are found in the
country. India alone accounts fornearly 20 per cent of the world™s total
iron-ore reserves. Bauxite, copper,

chromate, diamonds, gold, lead, lignite,
manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also
available in different parts of thecountry. However, the developmental
activities in India have resulted inpressure on its finite naturalresources, besides creating impacts on
human health and well-being. The
threat to India™s environment poses adichotomyŠthreat of poverty-induced

environmental degradation and, at the
same time, threat of pollution from

affluence and a rapidly growing
industrial sector. 
Air pollution,water contamination, soil erosion,deforestation and wildlife extinction

are some of the most pressing
environmental concerns of India. The
priority issues identified are (i) land
degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air
pollution with special reference tovehicular pollution in urban cities (iv)
management of fresh water and (v) solid
waste management. Land in India

suffers from varying degrees and types
of degradation stemming mainly fromunstable use 
and inappropriatemanagement practices.Fig. 9.3Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity  loss and
air pollution
168INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Box. 9.3: Chipko or Appiko Š What™s in a Name?You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests
in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,
‚Appiko™, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees

was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi
district, 160 men, women and children

hugged the trees and forced the
woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in
the forest over the next six weeks. Only
after the forest officials assured the
volunteers that the trees will be cut
scientifically and in accordance with the

working plan of the district, did they

leave the trees.When commercial felling bycontractors damaged a large number of
natural forests, the idea of hugging the
trees gave the people hope and
confidence that they can protect the
forests. On that particular incident, with
the felling discontinued, the people saved
12,000 trees. Within months, this

movement spread to many adjoining
districts.Indiscriminate felling of trees forfuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems.
Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo
has been wiped out from that area. ﬁBroad-leaved trees which protected the
soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed
away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weedﬂ, says

a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and

that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are
now attacking the crops.Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certainrules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when
trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source
and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled.Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries touse forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs
10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive
the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think?
Source: Excerpts from  ‚State of India™s Environment 2: The Second Citizens™ Report 1984-85™,
Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi.
