After studying this chapter, the learners will·understand the main challenges India faces in the areas of social andeconomic infrastructure·know the role of infrastructure in economic development·understand the role of energy as a critical component of infrastructure·understand the problems and prospects of the energy and health sectors·understand the health infrastructure of India.INFRASTRUCTURE8
140INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT8.1 INTRODUCTIONHave you ever thought of why somestates in India are performing muchbetter than others in certain areas? Whydo Punjab, Haryana and Himachal
Pradesh prosper in agriculture andhorticulture? Why are Maharashtraand Gujarat industrially moreadvanced than others? How comeKerala, popularly known as ‚God™s own
country™, has excelled in literacy, healthcare and sanitation and also attractstourists in such large numbers? Whydoes Karnataka™s informationtechnology industry attracts world
attention?It is all because these states havebetter infrastructure in the areas theyexcel than other states of India. Somehave better irrigation facilities. Others
have better transportation facilities, orare located near ports which makes  rawmaterials required for variousmanufacturing industries easily
accessible. Cities like Bengaluru in
Karnataka attract many multinationalcompanies because they provideworld-class communication facilities.All these support structures, whichfacilitate development of a country,
constitute its infrastructure. Howthen does infrastructure facilitatedevelopment?8.2 WHAT IS INFRASTRUCTURE?Infrastructure provides supportingservices in the main areas of industrialand agricultural production, domesticand foreign trade and commerce. These
services include roads, railways, ports,airports, dams, power stations, oil andgas pipelines, telecommunicationfacilities, the country™s educationalsystem including schools and colleges,
health system including hospitals,sanitary system including cleandrinking water facili-
ties and the monetarysystem including
banks, insurance andother financial institu-tions. Some of thesefacilities have a directimpact on production
of goods and serviceswhile others giveindirect support bybuilding the socialsector of the economy.ﬁMany things we need can wait, the child cannot. To him, we cannot say,‚tomorrow™. His name is today.ﬂGabrriella MistralŠChilean poetSo is the Infrastructure.Fig. 8.1 Roads are the missing link with growth
