 After studying this chapter, the learners will·come to know the goals of India™s five year plans·know about the development policies in different sectors such asagriculture and industry from 1950-1990·learn to think about the merits and limitations of a regulated economy.Indian Economy1950-19902
17INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-19902.1 INTRODUCTIONOn 15 August 1947, India woke to anew dawn of freedom. Finally we weremasters of our own destiny after
some two hundred years of British
rule; the job of nation building wasnow in our own hands.  The leadersof independent India had to decide,among other things, the type ofeconomic system most suitable forour nation, a system which wouldpromote the welfare of all rather thana few.  There are different types ofeconomic systems (see Box 2.1) andamong them, socialism appealed to
Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However,he was not in favour of the kind of
socialism established in the formerSoviet Union where all the means ofproduction, i.e. all the factories and
farms in the country, were owned bythe government. There was no privateproperty. It is not possible in ademocracy like India for thegovernment to change the ownership
pattern of land and other propertiesof its citizens in the way that it wasdone in the former Soviet Union.Nehru, and many other leaders andthinkers of the newly independentIndia, sought an alternative to theextreme versions of capitalism andsocialism. Basically sympathising withthe socialist outlook, they found theanswer in an economic system which,in their view, combined the best
features of socialism without itsdrawbacks. In this view, India wouldbe a socialist society with a strong
public sector but also with privateproperty and democracy; the governmentwould plan (see Box 2.2) for theThe central objective of Planning in India... is to initiate a process ofdevelopment which will raise the living standards and open out to the people
new opportunities for a richer and more varied life.First Five Year PlanWork These OutØPrepare a chart on thedifferent types of economicsystems prevalent in theworld. List out the countriesas capitalist, socialist andmixed economy.ØPlan a class trip to an
agriculture farm. Divide the
class into seven groups witheach group to plan a specificgoal, for example, thepurpose of the visit, money
expenditure involved, timetaken, resources, peopleaccompanying the groupand who need to becontacted, possible places
of visit, possible questionsto be asked etc. Now, withthe help of your teacher,compile these specific goals
and compare with long-term
goals of successful visit toan agricultural farm.
18INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTBox 2.1: Types of Economic SystemsEvery society has to answer three questionsØWhat goods and services should be produced in the country?ØHow should the goods and services be produced? Should producers usemore human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?ØHow should the goods and services be distributed among people?One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces ofsupply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only thoseconsumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that canbe sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If carsare in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycleswill be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensivemethods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist societythe goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what
people need but on the basis of Purchasing PowerŠthe ability to buy goodsand services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Lowcost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in
the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power toback the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced andsupplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to JawaharlalNehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of peopleof the country would be left behind without the chance to improve theirquality of life.A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally differentmanner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to beproduced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the
government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the
desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. Thegovernment decides how goods are to be produced and how they should bedistributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be basedon what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlikeunder capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care
to all its citizens.  Strictly, a socialist society has no private property sinceeverything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most ofthe economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles.Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and themarket together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to
produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, themarket will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, andthe government will provide essential goods and services which the marketfails to do.
19INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990economy with the private sector beingencouraged to be part of the plan effort.
The ‚Industrial Policy Resolution™ of1948 and the Directive Principles of
the Indian Constitution reflectedthis outlook.  In 1950, the PlanningCommission was set up with thePrime Minister as its Chairperson. Theera of five year plans had begun.2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANSA plan should have some clearlyspecified goals.  The goals of the five
year plans are: growth, modernisation,
self-reliance and equity. This does notmean that all the plans have givenequal importance to all these goals.
Due to limited resources, a choice has
to be made in each plan about whichof the goals is to be given primary
importance. Nevertheless, the planners
have to ensure that, as far as possible,the policies of the plans do notcontradict these four goals. Let us nowlearn about the goals of planning insome detail.Growth: It refers to increase in thecountry™s capacity to produce theoutput of goods and services withinthe country. It implies either alarger stock of productive capital,
or a larger size of supportingservices like transport andbanking, or an increase in theefficiency of productive capital and
services. A good indicator ofeconomic growth, in the language ofBox 2.2: What is a Plan?A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. Itshould have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are tobe achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans are of five yearsduration and are called five year plans (we borrowed this from the formerSoviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents not
only specify the objectives to be attained in the five years of a plan but alsowhat is to be achieved over a period of twenty years. This long-term plan iscalled ‚perspective plan™. The five year plans are supposed to provide thebasis for the perspective plan.It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equalimportance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For
example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict withthe goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need forlabour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed.We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India.Our five year plans do not spell out how much of each and every goodand service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary (theformer Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan  isspecific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance,power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market.
20INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTBox 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian PlanningMany distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of our five yearplans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta ChandraMahalanobis, stands out.Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five YearPlan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planningin general, laid down the basic ideas regarding
goals of Indian planning; this plan was basedon the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, hecan be regarded as the architect of Indianplanning.Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta.He was educated at the Presidency College in
Calcutta and at Cambridge University inEngland. His contributions to the subject ofstatistics brought him international fame. In1946 he was made a Fellow (member) of
Britain™s Royal Society, one of the mostprestigious organisations of scientists; only themost outstanding scientists are mademembers of this Society.Mahalanobis established the IndianStatistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and
started a journal, Sankhya, which still servesas a respected forum for statisticians  to
discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded bystatisticians and economists all over the world to this day.During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited manydistinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India™seconomic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winnerslater, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Amongthe economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical ofthe socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing tolisten to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar.Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated byMahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role inputting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue
to profit from his contribution to statistical theory.Source:Sukhamoy Chakravarty, ‚Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra™ in JohnEatwell et.al, (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary: EconomicDevelopment, W.W. Norton, New York and London.
21INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990economics, is steady increase in theGross Domestic Product (GDP). TheGDP is the market value of all thegoods and services produced in thecountry during a year. You can thinkof the GDP as a cake and growth isincrease in the size of the cake. If thecake is larger, more people can enjoyit.  It is necessary to produce more
goods and services if the people ofIndia are to enjoy (in the words of theFirst Five Year Plan) a more rich andvaried life.The GDP of a country is derivedfrom the different sectors of theeconomy, namely the agriculturalsector, the industrial sector and theservice sector. The contributionmade by each of these sectors makesup the structural composition ofthe economy.  In some countries,
growth in agriculture contributesmore to the GDP growth, while insome countries the growth in theservice sector contributes more toGDP growth (see Box 2.4).Modernisation: To increase theproduction of goods and servicesthe producers have to adopt newtechnology. For example, a farmer canincrease the output on the farm byusing new seed varieties instead of
using the old ones. Similarly, a factorycan increase output by using a newtype of machine. Adoption of newtechnology is called modernisation.However, modernisation does notrefer only to the use of new technology
but also to changes in social outlooksuch as the recognition that women
should have the same rights as men.In a traditional society, women are
supposed to remain at home whilemen work. A modern society makesuse of the talents of women in thework place Š in banks, factories,schools etc. Š  and such a society inmost occassions is also prosperous.Self-reliance: A nation can promoteeconomic growth and modernisation
by using its own resources or byusing resources imported from othernations. The first seven five year plansgave importance to self-reliancewhich means avoiding importsof those goods which could beBox 2.4: The Service SectorAs a country develops, it undergoes ‚structural change™. In the case of India,the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share ofagriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher
levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than theother two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than50 per centŠas we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share ofthe service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry,like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share ofthe service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked theonset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in a subsequentchapter).
22INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTproduced in India itself. This policywas considered a necessity in orderto reduce our dependence on foreign
countries, especially for food. It isunderstandable that people whowere recently freed from foreigndomination should give importanceto self-reliance. Further, it was fearedthat dependence on imported foodsupplies, foreign technology andforeign capital may make India™ssovereignty vulnerable to foreigninterference in our policies.Equity: Now growth, modernisationand self-reliance, by themselves, maynot improve the kind of life whichpeople are living. A country can havehigh growth, the most moderntechnology developed in the countryitself, and also have most of its peopleliving in poverty. It is important to
ensure that the benefits of economicprosperity reach the poor sections aswell instead of being enjoyed only bythe rich. So, in addition to growth,modernisation and self-reliance,
equity is also important. Every Indianshould be able to meet his or her basicneeds such as food, a decent house,
education and health care and
inequality in the distribution of wealthshould be reduced.Let us now see how the first sevenfive year plans, covering the period1950-1990, attempted to attain thesefour goals and the extent to which
they succeeded in doing so, withreference to agriculture, industryand trade. You will study the policiesand developmental issues taken upafter 1991 in Chapter 3.2.3 AGRICULTUREYou have learnt in Chapter 1 thatduring the colonial rule there wasneither growth nor equity in theagricultural sector. The policy makersof independent India had to addressthese issues which they did through
land reforms and promoting the useof ‚High Yielding Variety™ (HYV) seedswhich ushered in a revolution in
Indian agriculture.Land Reforms: At the time ofindependence, the land tenure systemwas characterised by intermediariesWork These OutØDiscuss in your class the changes in technology used for(a)  Production of food grains
(b)  Packaging of products(c)  Mass communicationØFind out and prepare a list of major items that India used to import andexport during 1990-91 and 2013-14.(a) Observe the difference(b) Do you see the impact of self-reliance? Discuss.For getting these details you may refer to Economic Survey of the latest year.
23INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990(variously called zamindars, jagirdarsetc.) who merely collected rent from theactual tillers of the soil without
contributing towards  improvementson the farm.  The low productivity ofthe agricultural sector forced India toimport food from the United States ofAmerica (U.S.A.). Equity in agriculturecalled for land reforms which primarilyrefer to change in the ownership oflandholdings. Just a year afterindependence, steps were taken toabolish intermediaries and to make thetillers the owners of land. The idea
behind this move was that ownershipof land would give incentives (see Box2.5) to the tillers to invest in makingimprovements provided sufficientcapital was made available to them.Land ceiling was another policy topromote equity in the agriculturalsector. This means fixing the maximumsize of land which could be owned by
an individual. The purpose of landceiling was to reduce the concentration
of land ownership in a few hands.The abolition of intermediariesmeant that some 200 lakh tenantscame into direct contact with thegovernment Š they were thusfreed from being exploited by thezamindars. The ownership conferredon tenants gave them the incentive to
increase output and this contributedto growth in agriculture. However, thegoal of equity was not fully servedby abolition of intermediaries. Insome areas the former zamindarsBox 2.5: Ownership and IncentivesThe policy of ‚land to the tiller™ is based on the idea that the cultivators willtake more interestŠthey will have more incentiveŠin increasing output ifthey are the owners of the land. This is because ownership of land enables thetiller to make profit from the increased output. Tenants do not have the incentiveto make improvements on land since it is the landowner who would benefitmore from higher output. The importance of ownership in providing incentives
is well illustrated by the carelessness with which farmers in the former SovietUnion used to pack fruits for sale. It was not uncommon to see farmers packingrotten fruits along with fresh fruits in the same box. Now, every farmer knowsthat the rotten fruits will spoil the fresh fruits if they are packed together. Thiswill be a loss to the farmer since the fruits cannot be sold. So why did theSoviet farmers do something which would so obviously result in loss for them?The answer lies in the incentives facing the farmers. Since farmers in theformer Soviet Union did not own any land, they neither enjoyed the profits norsuffered the losses. In the absence of ownership, there was no incentive onthe part of farmers to be efficient, which also explains the poor performance of
the agricultural sector in the Soviet Union despite availability of vast areas ofhighly fertile land.Source: Thomas Sowell, Basic Economics: A Citizen™s Guide to the Economy,New York: Basic Books, 2004, Second Edition.
24INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTcontinued to own large areas of landby making use of some loopholes inthe legislation; there were cases wheretenants were evicted and thelandowners claimed to be self-cultivators (the actual tillers), claimingownership of the land; and even when
the tillers got ownership of land, thepoorest of the agricultural labourers(such as sharecroppers and landlesslabourers) did not benefit from landreforms.The land ceiling legislation alsofaced hurdles. The big landlords
challenged the legislation in thecourts, delaying its implementation.They used this delay to register their
lands in the name of close relatives,thereby escaping from thelegislation. The legislation also hada lot of loopholes which wereexploited by the big landholders to
retain their land. Land reforms weresuccessful in Kerala and WestBengal because these states had
governments committed to the policyof land to the tiller. Unfortunatelyother states did not have the samelevel of commitment and vastinequality in landholding continuesto this day.The Green Revolution: Atindependence, about 75 per cent ofthe country™s population wasdependent on agriculture.Productivity in the agricultural sectorwas very low because of the use of old
technology and the absence ofrequired infrastructure for the vastmajority of farmers. India™sagriculture vitally depends on themonsoon and if the monsoon fell shortthe farmers were in trouble unless
they had access to irrigation facilitieswhich very few had. The stagnation inagriculture during the colonial rulewas permanently broken by the greenrevolution. This refers to the largeincrease in production of food grainsresulting from the use of high yieldingvariety (HYV) seeds especially forwheat and rice.  The use of these seeds
required the use of fertiliser and
pesticide in the correct quantities aswell as regular supply of water; theapplication of these inputs in correctproportions is vital. The farmers whocould benefit from HYV seeds required
reliable irrigation facilities as well asthe financial resources to purchasefertiliser and pesticide. As a result, inthe first phase of the green revolution(approximately mid 1960s upto mid
1970s), the use of HYV seeds wasrestricted to the more affluent statessuch as Punjab, Andhra Pradesh andTamil Nadu. Further, the use of HYVseeds primarily benefited  the wheat-growing regions only.  In the secondphase of the green revolution(mid-1970s to mid-1980s), the HYVtechnology spread to a larger numberof states and benefited more variety
of crops. The spread of greenrevolution technology enabled Indiato achieve self-sufficiency in foodgrains; we no longer had to be at themercy of America, or any other nation,
for meeting our nation™s foodrequirements.Growth in agricultural output isimportant but it is not enough. If alarge proportion of this increase is
25INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990consumed by the farmers themselvesinstead of being sold in the market,
the higher output will not make muchof a difference to the economy as awhole. If, on the other hand, asubstantial amount of agriculturalproduce is sold in the market by the
farmers, the higher output can makea difference to the economy. Theportion of agricultural produce whichis sold in the market by the farmersis called marketed surplus.  A goodproportion of the  rice and wheatproduced during  the green revolutionperiod  (available as marketedsurplus) was sold by the farmers inthe market. As a result, the price of
food grains declined relative to otheritems of consumption. The low-income groups, who spend a largepercentage of their income on food,benefited from this decline in relative
prices. The green revolution enabledthe government to procure sufficientamount of food grains to build a stockwhich could be used in times of foodshortage.While the nation had immenselybenefited from the green revolution, the
technology involved was not free fromrisks. One such risk was the possibilitythat it  would increase the disparitiesbetween small and big farmersŠsinceonly the big farmers could afford therequired inputs, thereby reaping mostof the benefits of the green revolution.Moreover, the HYV crops were also moreprone to attack by pests and the small
farmers who adopted this technologycould lose everything in a pest attack.
26INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTFortunately, these fears did notcome true because of the steps takenby the government. The governmentprovided loans at a low interest rateto small farmers and subsidisedfertilisers so that small farmers couldalso have access to the needed
inputs. Since the small farmers couldobtain the required inputs, theoutput on small farms equalled theoutput on large farms in the  course
of time. As a result, the greenrevolution benefited the small as wellas rich farmers.  The risk of the smallfarmers being ruined when pestsattack their crops was considerablyreduced by the services rendered byresearch institutes established by thegovernment. You should note thatthe green revolution would have
favoured the rich farmers only if thestate did not play an extensive rolein ensuring that the small farmer alsogains from the new technology.The Debate Over Subsidies: Theeconomic justification of subsidies inagriculture is, at present, a hotlydebated question. It is generallyagreed that it was necessary to use
subsidies to provide an incentive for
adoption of the new HYV technology
by farmers in general and smallfarmers in particular. Any newtechnology will be looked upon asbeing risky by farmers. Subsidies
were, therefore, needed to encourage
farmers to test the new technology.Some economists believe that oncethe technology is found profitable
and is widely adopted, subsidiesshould be phased out since theirpurpose has been served. Further,subsidies are meant to benefit thefarmers but a substantial amount of
fertiliser subsidy also benefits thefertiliser industry; and amongfarmers, the subsidy largely benefits
the farmers in the more prosperous
regions. Therefore, it is argued thatthere is no case for continuing with
fertiliser subsidies; it does not benefitthe target group and it is a huge
burden on the government™s finances
(see also Box 2.6).On the other hand, some believethat the government should continuewith agricultural subsidies becausefarming in India continues to be a
risky business. Most farmers are very
poor and they will not be able to
afford the required inputs withoutsubsidies. Eliminating subsidies willincrease the inequality between rich
and poor farmers and violate the goal
of equity. These experts argue that if
subsidies are largely benefiting thefertiliser industry and big farmers,the correct policy is not to abolishsubsidies but to take steps to ensure
that only the poor farmers enjoy the
benefits.Thus, by the late 1960s, Indianagricultural productivity had increased
sufficiently to enable the country to be
self-sufficient in food grains.  This is anachievement to be proud of. On thenegative side, some 65 per cent of the
country™s population continued to be
employed in agriculture even as late as
1990. Economists have found that as
27INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990a nation becomes more prosperous, theproportion of GDP contributed byagriculture as well as the proportion ofpopulation working in the sector
declines considerably. In India,
between 1950 and 1990, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture declined significantly but
not the population depending on it(67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent
by 1990). Why was such a largeproportion of the population engagedin agriculture although agricultural
output could have grown with muchless people working in the sector? Theanswer is that the industrial sector and
the service sector did not absorb the
people working in the agriculturalsector. Many economists call this animportant failure of our policies
followed during 1950-1990.2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADEEconomists have found that poor
nations can progress only if they have
a good industrial sector. Industryprovides employment which is more
stable than the employment in
agriculture; it promotes modernisationand overall prosperity. It is for thisreason that the five year plans placea lot of emphasis on industrialdevelopment. You might havestudied in the previous chapter that,at the time of independence, thevariety of industries was very narrowBox 2.6: Prices as SignalsYou would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods aredetermined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signalsabout the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise andthose who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisionsabout its use based on the price.  If the price of water goes up because of lowersupply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example,
they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain wheneverthe price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase
in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that lesspetrol is availableŠthis provides an incentive to use less petrol or look foralternate fuels.Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicatethe supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidisedrate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity.Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, althoughthe water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further
deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity,farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticidesubsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to theenvironment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is
wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers.
28INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTŠ largely confined to cotton textilesand jute. There were two well-managed iron and steel firms Š onein Jamshedpur and the other in
Kolkata Š but, obviously, we neededto expand the industrial base with avariety of industries if the economywas to grow.Public and Private Sectors in Indian
Industrial Development: The bigquestion facing the policy makers was
Š  what should be the role of thegovernment and the private sector inindustrial development? At the time ofindependence, Indian industrialists didnot have the capital to undertakeWork These OutØA group of students may visit an agricultural farm, prepare a case study on
the method of farming used, that is, types of seeds, fertilisers, machines,
means of irrigation, cost involved, marketable surplus and income earned.It will be beneficial if the changes in cultivation methods could be collectedfrom an elderly member of the farming family(a)Discuss the findings in your class.(b)The different groups can then prepare a chart showing variations in
cost of production, productivity, use of seeds, fertilisers, means ofirrigation, time taken, marketable surplus and income of the family.ØCollect newspaper cuttings related to the World Bank, InternationalMonetary Fund, World Trade Organisation  (and meets of G7, G8, G10countries). Discuss the views shared by the developed and developingcountries on farm subsidies.ØPrepare pie charts on the occupational structure of the Indian economyavailable in the following table.     Sector1950Œ511990Œ91
Agriculture72.166.8
Industry10.712.7
Services17.220.5
ØStudy the arguments for and against agricultural subsidies. What is yourview on this issue?ØSome economists argue that farmers in other countries, particularlydeveloped countries, are provided with high amount of subsidies and areencouraged to export their produce to other countries. Do you think ourfarmers will be able to compete with farmers from developed countries?Discuss.
29INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990investment in industrial venturesrequired for the development of oureconomy; nor was the market bigenough to encourage industrialists toundertake major projects even if theyhad the capital to do so. It is principallyfor these reasons that the state had toplay an extensive role in promoting theindustrial sector. In addition, thedecision to develop the Indian economy
on socialist lines led to the policy of thestate controlling the commandingheights of the economy, as the SecondFive  Year plan put it. This meant thatthe state would have complete control
of those industries that were vital forthe economy. The policies of the privatesector would have to be complimentaryto those of the public sector, with thepublic sector leading the way.Industrial Policy Resolution 1956(IPR 1956): In accordance with thegoal of the state controlling thecommanding heights of the economy,the Industrial Policy Resolution of1956 was adopted. This resolution
formed the basis of the Second FiveYear Plan, the plan which tried tobuild the basis for a socialist pattern
of society. This resolution classifiedindustries into three categories. Thefirst category comprised industrieswhich would be exclusively owned bythe state; the second categoryconsisted of industries in which theprivate sector could supplement theefforts of the state sector, with thestate taking the sole responsibility for
starting new units; the third categoryconsisted of the remaining industrieswhich were to be in the private sector.Although there was a category ofindustries left to the private sector,the sector was kept under statecontrol through a system of licenses.No new industry was allowed unlessa license was obtained from thegovernment. This policy was used forpromoting industry in backwardregions; it was easier to obtain alicense if the industrial unit was
established in an economicallybackward area. In addition, suchunits were given certain concessionssuch as tax benefits and electricityat a lower tariff. The purpose of thispolicy was to promote regionalequality.Even an existing industry had toobtain a license for expanding
output or for diversifying production(producing a new variety of goods).This was meant  to ensure that thequantity of goods produced was notmore than what the economyrequired. License to expandproduction was given only if thegovernment was convinced that theeconomy required a larger quantityof goods.Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, theVillage and Small-Scale IndustriesCommittee, also called the KarveCommittee, noted the possibility of
using small-scale industries forpromoting rural development. A‚small-scale industry™ is defined withreference to the  maximum invest-ment allowed on the assets of a unit.
This limit has changed over a period
of time. In 1950 a small-scaleindustrial unit was one which invested
30INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTa maximum of rupees five lakh; atpresent the maximum investmentallowed is rupees one crore.It is believed that small-scaleindustries are more ‚labour intensive™
i.e., they use more labour than the
large-scale industries and, therefore,generate more employment. But theseindustries cannot compete with the big
industrial firms; it is obvious thatdevelopment of small-scale industryrequires them to be shielded from the
large firms. For this purpose, the
production of a number of productswas reserved for the small-scaleindustry; the criterion of reservation
being the ability of these units tomanufacture the goods. They were alsogiven concessions such as lower excise
duty and bank loans at lower interestrates.2.5 TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTIONThe industrial policy that we adoptedwas closely related to the tradepolicy. In the first seven plans, tradewas characterised by what is
commonly called an inward lookingtrade strategy. Technically, thisstrategy is called import substi-tution. This policy aimed at replacingor substituting imports with domestic
production. For example, instead ofimporting vehicles made in a foreigncountry, industries would beencouraged to produce them in Indiaitself. In this policy the governmentprotected the domestic industriesfrom foreign competition. Protectionfrom imports took two forms: tariffsand quotas. Tariffs are a tax onimported goods; they make importedgoods more expensive and discouragetheir use. Quotas specify the quantityof goods which can be imported. Theeffect of tariffs and quotas is that theyrestrict imports and, therefore, protectthe domestic firms from foreigncompetition.The policy of protection is basedon the notion that industries ofdeveloping countries are not in aposition to compete against thegoods produced by more developedeconomies. It is assumed that if thedomestic industries are protectedthey will learn to compete in thecourse of time. Our planners alsofeared the possibility of foreignexchange being spent on import ofluxury goods if no restrictions wereplaced on imports. Nor was anyserious thought given to promoteexports until the mid-1980s.Effect of Policies on IndustrialDevelopment: The achievements ofIndia™s industrial sector during the
first seven plans are impressiveindeed. The proportion of GDPcontributed by the industrialsector increased in the period from11.8 per cent in 1950-51 to 24.6 percent in 1990-91. The rise in theindustry™s share of GDP is animportant indicator of development.The six per cent annual growth rateof the industrial sector during theperiod is commendable. No longerwas Indian industry restricted largely
to cotton textiles and jute; in fact, theindustrial sector became well
diversified by 1990, largely due to
31INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990the public sector. The promotionof small-scale industries gaveopportunities to those people who didnot have the capital to start largefirms to get into business. Protectionfrom foreign competition enabled thedevelopment of indigenous industriesin the areas of electronics andautomobile sectors which otherwisecould not have developed.In spite of the contribution madeby the public sector to the growth of
the Indian economy, some economists
are critical of the performance ofmany public sector enterprises. It
was proposed at the beginning of thischapter that initially public sectorwas required in a big way. It is now
widely held that state enterprisescontinued to produce certain goods
and services (often monopolisingthem) although this was no longerrequired. An example is the provisionof telecommunication service. Thisindustry continued to be reserved for
the Public Sector even after it wasrealised that private sector firms couldalso provide it. Due to the absence of
competition, even till the late 1990s,one had to wait for a long time toget a telephone connection.Another instance could be theestablishment of Modern Bread, abread-manufacturing firm, as if theWork These OutØConstruct a pie chart for the following table on sectoral contribution to GDP
and discuss the difference in the contribution of the sectors in the light of
effects of development during 1950-91.Sector1950-511990-91
Agriculture59.034.9
Industry13.024.6
Services28.040.5
ØConduct a debate in your classroom on the usefulness of Public SectorUndertakings (PSUs) by dividing the class into two groups. One group mayspeak in favour of PSUs and the other group against the motion (involve as
many students as possible and encourage them to give examples).
32INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTprivate sector could not manufacturebread! In 2001 this firm was sold tothe private sector. The point is thatafter four decades of Planned
development of Indian Economy nodistinction was made between (i)what the public sector alone can doand (ii) what the private sector canalso do.  For example, even now only
the public sector supplies nationaldefense. And even though the private
sector can manage hotels well, yet,the government also runs hotels. Thishas led some scholars to argue thatthe state should get out of areaswhich the private sector can manageand the government may concentrateits resources on important serviceswhich the private sector cannotprovide.Many public sector firms incurredhuge losses but continued tofunction because it is difficult to closea government undertaking even if itis a drain on the nation™s limitedresources. This does not mean thatprivate firms are always profitable(indeed, quite a few of the publicsector firms were originally privatefirms which were on the verge ofclosure due to losses; they were thennationalised to protect the jobs of theworkers). However, a loss-makingprivate firm will not waste resources
by being kept running despite thelosses.The need to obtain a license to startan industry was misused byindustrial houses; a big industrialistwould get a license not for starting a
new firm but to prevent competitorsfrom starting new firms. The excessiveregulation of what came to be called
the permit license raj preventedcertain firms from becoming more
efficient. More time was spent byindustrialists in trying to obtain alicense or lobby with the concernedministries rather than on thinkingabout how to improve their products.The protection from foreigncompetition is also being criticised onthe ground that it continued evenafter it proved to do more harm thangood. Due to restrictions on imports,the Indian consumers had topurchase whatever the Indianproducers produced. The producerswere aware that they had a captivemarket; so they had no incentive toimprove the quality of their goods.Why should they think of improvingquality when they could sell lowquality items at a high price?Competition from imports forces ourproducers to be more efficient.A few economists also point outthat the public sector is not meantfor earning profits but to promote thewelfare of the nation. The public
sector firms, on this view, should beevaluated on the basis of the extent
to which they contribute to the welfareof people and not on the profits theyearn. Regarding protection, someeconomists hold that we shouldprotect our producers from foreigncompetition as long as the rich
nations continue to do so. Owing toall these conflicts, economists calledfor a change in our policy. This,alongwith other problems, led the
government to introduce a new
economic policy in 1991.
33INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-19902.6 CONCLUSIONThe progress of the Indian economyduring the first seven plans was
impressive indeed. Our industries
became far more diversified compared
to the situation at independence.
India became self- sufficient in foodproduction thanks to the green
revolution. Land reforms resulted in
abolition of the hated zamindarisystem. However, many economistsbecame dissatisfied with theperformance of many public sector
enterprises. Excessive governmentregulation prevented growth ofentrepreneurship. In the name of self-reliance, our producers wereprotected against foreign competition
and this did not give them theincentive to improve the quality ofgoods that they produced. Ourpolicies were ‚inward oriented™ and so
we failed to develop a strong export
sector. The need for reform ofeconomic policy was widely felt in the
context of changing global economic
scenario, and the new economic policy
was initiated in 1991 to make our
economy more efficient. This is thesubject of the next chapter.RecapØAfter independence, India envisaged an economic system which combinesthe best features of socialism and capitalismŠthis culminated in the mixedeconomy model.ØAll the economic planning has been formulated through five year plans.ØCommon goals of five year plans are growth, modernisation, self-sufficiencyand equity.ØThe major policy initiatives in agriculture sector were land reforms andgreen revolution. These initiatives helped India to become self-sufficient in
food grains production.ØThe proportion of people depending on agriculture did not decline as expected.ØPolicy initiatives in the industrial sector raised its contribution to GDP.ØOne of the major drawbacks in the industrial sector was the inefficient
functioning of the public sector as it started incurring losses leading to
drain on the nation™s limited resources.
34INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT1.Define a plan.2.Why did India opt for planning?3.Why should plans have goals?4.What are High Yielding Variety (HYV) seeds?5.What is marketable surplus?6.Explain the need and type of land reforms implemented in theagriculture sector.7.What is Green Revolution? Why was it implemented and how didit benefit the farmers? Explain in brief.8.Explain ‚growth with equity™ as a planning objective.9.Does modernisation as a planning objective create contradiction
in the light of employment generation? Explain.10.Why was it necessary for a developing country like India to followself-reliance as a planning objective?11.What is sectoral composition of an economy? Is it necessary that
the service sector should contribute maximum to GDP of aneconomy? Comment.12.Why was public sector given a leading role in industrial
development during the planning period?13.Explain the statement that green revolution enabled thegovernment to procure sufficient food grains to build its stocksthat could be used during times of shortage.14.While subsidies encourage farmers to use new technology, they are
a huge burden on government finances. Discuss the usefulness of
subsidies in the light of this fact.15.Why, despite the implementation of green revolution, 65 per centof our population continued to be engaged in the agriculture sectortill 1990?16.Though public sector is very essential for industries, many publicsector undertakings incur huge losses and are a drain on theeconomy™s resources. Discuss the usefulness of public sectorundertakings in the light of this fact.EXERCISES
35INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-199017.Explain how import substitution can protect domestic industry.18.Why and how was private sector regulated under the IPR 1956?19.Match the following:1. Prime MinisterA.Seeds that give large proportion of output2. Gross DomesticB.Quantity of goods that can be imported   Product3. QuotaC.Chairperson of the planning commission4. Land ReformsD.The money value of all the final goodsand services produced within the economyin one year5. HYV SeedsE.Improvements in the field of agriculture
to increase its productivity6. SubsidyF.
The monetary assistance given bygovernment for productionactivities.BHAGWATI, J. 1993. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. OxfordUniversity Press, Delhi.DANDEKAR, V.M. 2004.  Forty Years After Independence, in Bimal  Jalan,(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.JOSHI, VIJAY.  and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India™s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.Oxford University Press, Delhi.MOHAN,  RAKESH. 2004. Industrial Policy and Controls, in Bimal  Jalan(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.RAO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. 
2004. Agriculture: Policy and Performance, in BimalJalan, (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin,Delhi.REFERENCES
