116INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT After studying this chapter, the learners will·understand a few basic concepts relating to employment such aseconomic activity, worker, workforce and unemployment·understand the nature of participation of men and women in variouseconomic activities in various sectors·know the nature and extent of unemployment·assess the initiatives taken by the government in generating employmentopportunities in various sectors and regions.EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH,INFORMALISATIONAND OTHER ISSUES7
117EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES7.1 INTRODUCTIONPeople do a variety of work.Some work on farms, infactories, banks, shops andmany other workplaces; yet afew others work at home. Workat home includes not onlytraditional work like weaving,lace making or variety ofhandicrafts but also modernjobs like programming work in
the IT industry. Earlier factorywork meant working infactories located in cities
whereas now technology hasenabled people to produce thosefactory-based goods at home invillages.Why do people work? Work playsan important role in our lives as
individuals and as members of society.People work for ‚earning™ a living. Somepeople get, or have, money by inheritingit, not working for it. This does not
completely satisfy anybody. Beingemployed in work gives us a sense ofself-worth and enables us to relateourselves meaningfully with others.Every working person is actively
contributing to national income andhence, the development of the countryby engaging in various economicactivities Š that is the real meaning of‚earning™ a living. We do not work onlyfor ourselves; we also have a sense of
accomplishment when we work to meet
the requirements of those who aredependent on us. Having recognisedthe  importance of work, MahatmaGandhi insisted upon education andtraining through a variety of works
including craft.Studying about working peoplegives us insights into the quality andnature of employment in our countryand helps in understanding and
planning our human resources. It helpsus to analyse the contribution made bydifferent industries and sectors towardsnational income. It also helps us toaddress many social issues such as
exploitation of marginalised sections ofthe society, child labour etc.What I object to, is the ‚craze™ for machinery, not machinery as such. Thecraze is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‚saving labour™
till thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of
starvation...Mahatma GandhiFig. 7.1 Multinational companies sell footballsmade in the houses of Jalandhar, Punjab
118INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT7.2 WORKERS  AND EMPLOYMENTWhat is employment? Who is a worker?When a farmer works on fields, he orshe produces food grains and rawmaterials for industries. Cotton
becomes cloth in textile mills and inpowerlooms. Lorries transport goodsfrom one place to another. We knowthat the total money value of all such
goods and services produced in a
country in a year is called its grossdomestic product for that year. Whenwe also consider what we pay for our
imports and get from our exports wefind that there is a net earning for the
country which may be positive (if wehave exported more in value terms thanimported) or negative (if importsexceeded exports in value terms) or zero(if exports and imports were of the same
value). When we add this earning (plusor minus) from foreign transactions,
what we get is called the country™s grossnational product for that year.Those activities which contribute tothe gross national product are called
economic activities. All those who areengaged in economic activities, inwhatever capacity Š high or low, areworkers. Even if some of them
temporarily abstain from work due toillness, injury or other physicaldisability, bad weather, festivals, socialor religious functions, they are also
workers.  Workers also include all thosewho help the main workers in theseactivities. We generally think of onlythose who are paid by an employer for
their work as workers. This is not so.Those who are self-employed are also
workers.The nature of employment in Indiais multifaceted. Some get employment
throughout the year; some others getemployed for only a few months in ayear. Many workers do not get fairwages for their work. While estimating
the number of workers, all those who
are engaged in economic activities areincluded as employed. You might beinterested in knowing the number of
people actively engaged in variouseconomic activities. During 2011-12,
India had about a 473 million strongworkforce. Since majority of our peoplereside in rural areas, the proportion ofworkforce residing there is higher. TheWork This OutØIn your house orneighbourhood, you mightcome across many womenwho, even though theyhave technical degreesand diplomas and also freetime to go to work, do not
go to work. Ask them thereasons for not going towork. List all of them anddiscuss in the classroomwhether they should go for
work and why, and alsoways by which they couldbe sent for work.  Somesocial scientists argue thathousewives working at
home without getting paidfor that work must also beregarded as contributing tothe gross national productand therefore, as engaged
in an economic activity.Would you agree?
119EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESrural workers constitute about three-fourth of this 473 million. Men form the
majority of workforce in India. About70 per cent of the workers are men andthe rest are women (men and womeninclude child labourers in respective
sexes). Women workers account forone-third of the rural workforcewhereas in urban areas, they are justone-fifth of the workforce. Womencarry out works like cooking, fetching
water and fuelwood and participate in
farm labour. They are not paid wagesin cash or in the form of grains; at
times they are not paid at all. For thisreason, these women are notcategorised as workers. Economists
have argued that these women shouldalso be called workers.7.3 PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE INEMPLOYMENTWorker-population ratio is an indicatorwhich is used for analysing theemployment situation in the country.This ratio is useful in knowing theproportion of population that isactively contributing to the productionof goods and services of a country. If
the ratio is higher, it means that theengagement of people is greater; if the
ratio for a country is medium, or low,it means that a very high proportionof its population is not involved
directly in economic activities.You might have already studied,in lower classes, the meaning of theterm ‚population™. Population isdefined as the total number of people
who reside in a particular locality ata particular point of time. If you wantto know the worker-population ratiofor India, divide the total number ofworkers in India by the population inIndia and multiply it by 100, you willget the worker-population ratio forIndia.If you look at Table 7.1, it showsthe different levels of participation ofpeople in economic activities. Forevery 100 persons, about 39 (byrounding off 38.6) are workers inIndia. In urban areas, the proportion
is about 36 whereas in rural India, theratio is about 40. Why is there such adifference? People in rural areas havelimited resources to earn a higherincome and participate more in the
employment market. Many do not goto schools, colleges and other traininginstitutions. Even if some go, theydiscontinue in the middle to join theworkforce; whereas, in urban areas, a
considerable section is able to study invarious educational institutions. Urbanpeople have a variety of employmentopportunities. They look for theappropriate job to suit their
qualifications and skills. In rural areas,people cannot stay at home as theireconomic condition may not allow themto do so.TABLE 7.1Worker-Population Ratio in India,2009-2010SexWorker-Population RatioTotalRuralUrbanMen54.454.354.6
Women21.924.814.7
Total38.639.935.5

120INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTCompared to females, more malesare found to be working. The differencein participation rates is very large inurban areas: for every 100 urbanfemales, only about 15 are engaged insome economic activities. In rural areas,for every 100 rural women about 25
participate in the employment market.Why are women, in general, and urbanwomen, in particular, not working? Itis common to find
that where men are
able to earn highincomes, familiesdiscourage femalemembers fromtaking up jobs.Going back towhat has already
been mentionedabove, many activi-ties for the household
engaged in by womenare not  recognised asproductive work.This narrow defini-tion of work leads to
non-recognition ofwomen™s work and, therefore, to the
underestimation of the number of
women workers in the country. Thinkof the women actively engaged in manyactivities within the house and at familyfarms who are not paid for such work.As they certainly contribute to the
maintenance of the household andfarms, do you think that their numbershould be added to the number ofwomen workers?7.4 SELF-EMPLOYED AND HIREDWORKERSDoes the worker-population ratio sayanything about workers™ status insociety or about the workingconditions? By knowing the statuswith which a worker is placed in an
enterprise, it may be possible to knowone dimension Š quality of employmentin a country. It also enables us to knowthe attachment a worker has with hisFig. 7.2 Brick-making: a form of casual workWork These OutØAny study of employment
must start with a review
of the worker-populationratios Š why?ØIn some communities, you
might have noticed thateven if the males do notearn a high income, they donot send women to work.Why?
121EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESor her job and the authority she or hehas over the enterprise and over other
co-workers.Let us take three workers from theconstruction industry Š a cement shop
owner, a construction worker and a civilengineer of a construction company. Since
the status of each one of them is differentfrom another, they arealso called differently.Workers who own andoperate an enterprise to
earn their livelihoodare known as self-employed. Thus thecement shop owner is
self-employed. About 52per cent workforce inIndia belongs to thiscategory. The construction
workers are known ascasual wage labourers;they account for 30 percent of India™s workforce.Such labourers arecasually engaged in others™
farms and, in return,  get aremuneration for the workdone. Workers like the civilengineer working in theconstruction company
account for 18 per cent ofIndia™s workforce. When  a
worker is engaged bysomeone or an enterpriseand paid his or her wages
on a regular basis, they areknown as regular salariedemployees.Look at Chart 7.1:you will notice that self-employment is a major source of
livelihood for both men and women asthis category accounts for more than50 per cent of the workforce in bothdiagrams. Casual wage work is the
second major source for both men andwomen, a little more so for the latter(31 per cent). When it comes to regularChart 7.1 : Distribution of Employmentby Gender Chart 7.2 : Distribution of Employment by Region Urban WorkersRural WorkersSelf-employed         Regular Salaried Employees Casual Wage LabourersMale WorkersFemale WorkersSelf-employedCasual Wage LabourersRegular Salaried Employees13%31%51%20%29%56%43%15%42%35%56%9%
122INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTurban areas. In the latter, both self-employment and regular wage salariedjobs are greater. In the former, sincemajority of those depending on farmingown plots of land and cultivate
independently, the share of self-
employed is greater.The nature of work in urban areasis different. Obviously everyone cannot
run factories, shops and offices of
various types. Moreover enterprises inurban areas require workers on aregular basis.salaried employment, men are found  tobe so engaged in greater proportion.They form 20 per cent whereas womenform only 13 per cent. One of the reasonscould be skill requirement. Since regular
salaried jobs require skills and a higherlevel of literacy, women might not havebeen engaged to a great extent.When we compare the distributionof workforce in rural and urban areas
in Chart 7.2 you will notice that the self-employed and casual wage labourers
are found more in rural areas than inWork These OutØWe generally think that only those who are doing paid work regularly orcasually such as agricultural labourers, factory workers, those who workin banks and other offices as assistants and clerks are workers. From theabove discussion, you must have understood that those who are self-employed such as pavement vegetable vendors, professionals such aslawyers, doctors and engineers are also workers.  Mark (a), (b) and (c) againstself-employed, regular salaried employees and casual wage labourers
respectively:1.Owner of a saloon2.Worker in a rice mill who is paid on daily basis but employed regularly3.Cashier in State Bank of India4.Typist working in a state government office on a daily wage basis butpaid monthly5.A handloom weaver6.Loading worker in wholesale vegetable shop7.Owner of a cool drinks shop which sells Pepsi, Coca Cola and Mirinda8.Nurse in a private hospital who gets monthly salary and has beenworking regularly for the past 5 years.ØEconomists point out that casual wage labourers are the most vulnerableamong the three categories. Could you locate who these workers are andwhere they are found and why?ØCan we say that the self-employed earn more than the casual wage labourersor regular salaried employees? Identify a few other indicators of quality of
employment.
123EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES7.5 EMPLOYMENT INFIRMS, FACTORIESAND OFFICESIn the course ofeconomic development ofa country, labour flows
from agriculture andother related activities toindustry and services. Inthis process, workersmigrate from rural to
urban areas. Eventually,at a much later stage,the industrial sector begins to lose itsshare of total employment as the servicesector enters a period of rapid
expansion. This shift can be understoodby looking at the distribution ofworkers by industry. Generally, wedivide all economic activities into eightdifferent industrial divisions. They are
(i) Agriculture (ii) Mining and Quarrying(iii) Manufacturing (iv) Electricity, Gasand Water Supply (v) Construction (vi)Trade (vii) Transport and Storage and(viii) Services. For simplicity, all theworking persons engaged in thesedivisions can be clubbed into threemajor sectors viz., (a) primary sector
which includes (i) , (b) secondary sectorwhich includes (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) and(c) service sector which includesdivisions (vi), (vii) and (viii). Table 7.2shows the distribution of working
persons in different industries duringthe year 2011-12.Primary sector is the main sourceof employment for majority of workersTABLE 7.2Distribution of Workforce by Industry, 2011-2012Industrial CategoryPlace of Residence     Sex TotalRuralUrbanMenWomenPrimary Sector66.69.043.662.848.9
Secondary Sector16.031.025.920.024.3
Tertiary/Service Sector17.460.030.517.226.8
Total100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0
Fig. 7.3 Garment workers: upcoming factory employment for women
124INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTin India. Secondary sector providesemployment to only about 24 per centof workforce. About 27 per cent of
workers are in the service sector. Table7.2 also shows that about 67 per cent
of the workforce in rural India depends
on agriculture, forestry and fishing.
About 16 per cent of rural workers are
working in manufacturing industries,construction and other industrialactivities. Service sector provides
employment to only about 17 per cent
of rural workers. Agriculture is not a
major source of employment in urbanareas where people  are mainly engagedin the service sector. About 60 per centof urban workers are in the service
sector. The secondary sector givesemployment to about 30 per cent ofurban workforce.Though both men and womenworkers are concentrated in theprimary sector, women workers™concentration is very high there. About63 per cent of the  female workforce isemployed in the primary sector whereas
less than half of males work in that
sector. Men get opportunities in bothsecondary and service sectors.7.6 GROWTH AND CHANGING STRUCTUREOF EMPLOYMENTIn Chapters 2 and 3, you might havestudied about the planning strategies
in detail. Here we will look at twodevelopmental indicators Š growth ofemployment and GDP. Sixty years ofplanned development have been aimed
at expansion of the economy throughincrease in national output andemployment.During the period 1950Œ2010,Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Indiagrew positively and was higher thanthe employment growth. However,there was always fluctuation in the
growth of GDP. During this period,employment grew at the rate of notmore than 2 per cent.Chart 7.3 also points at anotherdisheartening development in the late
1990s: employment growth started
declining and reached the level ofgrowth that India had in the earlystages of planning. During these years,we also find a widening gap betweenthe growth of GDP and employment.
This means that in the Indian economy,without generating employment, wehave been able to produce more goodsWork This OutØAll newspapers have one section meant for job opportunities. Some alsodevote an entire supplement in a day or every week like Opportunities inThe Hindu or Ascent in The Times of India. Many companies advertisevacancies for various positions. Cut those sections. Develop a table which
contains four columns: whether the company is private or public, name ofthe post, number of posts, sector Š primary, secondary or tertiary Š and
qualification required. Analyse the table in the classroom about jobsadvertised in the newspapers.
125EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESand services. Scholars refer to thisphenomenon as jobless growth.So far we have seen howemployment has grown in comparison
to GDP. Now it is necessary to knowhow the growth pattern of employment
and GDP affected different sections of
workforce. From this we will also beable to understand what types ofemployment are generated in ourcountry.Let us look at two indicators thatwe have seen in the preceding sections
Š employment of people in variousindustries and their status. We knowthat India is an agrarian nation; amajor section of population lives in
rural areas andis dependent onagriculture as their main livelihood.Developmental strategies in many
countries, including India, have aimed
at reducing the proportion of peopledepending on agriculture.Distribution of workforce byindustrial sectors shows substantialshift from farm work to non-farm work
(see Table 7.3). In 1972-73, about 74per cent of workforce was engaged inprimary sector and in 2011-12, thisproportion has declined to about50 per cent. Secondary and service
sectors are showing promising futurefor the Indian workforce. You maynotice that the shares of these sectors
have increased from 11 to 24 per centand 15 to 27 per cent, respectively.The distribution of workforce indifferent status indicates that over theChart 7.3: Growth of Employment and Gross DomesticProduct, 1951Œ2012 (%)
126INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTlast four decades (1972-2012
),people have moved from self-employment and regular salariedemployment to casual wage work. Yetself-employment continues to be themajor employment provider. Scholarscall the process of moving fromself-employment and regularsalaried employment to casual wagework as casualisation of workforce.This makes the workers highlyvulnerable. How? Look at the casestudy of Ahmedabad in the precedingsection.Item1972-7319831993-941999-2000   2011-2012SectorPrimary74.368.6
6460.448.9
Secondary10.911.5
1615.824.3
Services14.816.9
2023.826.8
Total100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0
StatusSelf-employed61.457.354.652.652.0
Regular Salaried Employees15.413.813.614.618.0
Casual Wage Labourers23.228.931.832.830.0
Total100.0100.0100.0100.0100.0
TABLE 7.3Trends in Employment Pattern (Sector-wise and Status-wise), 1972-2012 (in %)Work These OutØDo you know that maintaining employment growth at 2 per cent for a countrylike India is not an easy thing? Why?ØWhat will happen if there is no additional employment generated in theeconomy even though we are able to produce goods and services in theeconomy? How could jobless growth happen?ØEconomists say that if casualisation increases the earning of the people,such phenomenon should be welcomed. Suppose a marginal farmer becomesa full-time agricultural labourer, do you think he will be happy even if heearns more in his daily wage work? Or will a permanent and regular worker
of the pharmaceutical industry be happy if he  becomes a daily wage labourer,even if his or her overall earnings increase? Discuss in the classroom.
127EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES7.7 INFORMALISATION OF INDIANWORKFORCEIn the previous section we have foundthat the proportion of casual labourershas been increasing. One of the objectivesof development planning in India, since
India™s independence, has been toprovide decent livelihood to its people. Ithas been envisaged that the
industrialisation strategy would bring
surplus workers from agriculture toindustry with better standard of living asin developed countries. We have seen inthe preceding section,  that even after 55years of planned development, more thanhalf of the Indian workforce depends onfarming as the major source of livelihood.Economists argue that, over theyears, the quality of employment hasbeen deteriorating. Even after working for
more than 10-20 years, why do someworkers not get maternity benefit,provident fund, gratuity and pension?
Why does a person working in the privatesector get a  lower salary as compared toanother person doing the same work but
in the public sector?You may find that a small sectionof Indian workforce is getting regularincome. The government, through itslabour laws, enable them to protecttheir rights in various ways. This
section of the workforce forms tradeunions, bargains with employers forbetter wages and other social securitymeasures. Who are they? To know this
we classify workforce into twocategories: workers in formal andinformal sectors, which are also referredto as organised and unorganisedsectors. All the public sectorestablishments and those privatesector establishments  which employ10 hired workers or more are called
formal sector establishments and thosewho work in such establishments areformal sector workers. All otherenterprises and workers working inthose enterprises form the informalsector. Thus, informal sector includesmillions of farmers, agricultural
labourers, owners of small enterprisesand people working in those enterprisesas also the self-employed who do nothave any hired workers. It also includesall non-farm casual wage labourerswho work for more than one employersuch as construction workers andheadload workers.Those who are working in the formalsector enjoy social security benefits.Box 7.1: Formal Sector EmploymentThe information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by theUnion Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts
of the country. Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector inIndia? In 2012, out of about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 millionworkers were employed by the public sector.  Here also men form the majority, aswomen constitute only about one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economistspoint out that the reform process initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline
in the number of workers employed in the formal sector.  What do you think?
128INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTThey earn more than those in theinformal sector. Developmentalplanning envisaged that as the economygrows, more and more workers wouldbecome formal sector workers and theproportion of workers engaged in theinformal sector would dwindle.
But what has happened in India?Look at the followingchart which givesthe distribution ofworkforce in formal
and informal sectors.In Section 7.2, welearnt that there areabout 473 millionworkers in the country.There are about 30million workers in the
formal sector. Can youestimate the percentage
of people employed in
the formal sectors inthe country? About only six per cent(30/473×100)! Thus, the rest 94 percent are in the informal sector. Out of30 million formal sector workers, only6 million, that is, only about 21 per cent(30/6×100) are women. In the informalsector, male workers account for 69 percent of  the workforce.Chart 7.4: Workers in Formal/ Informal Sector, 2009-2012Fig. 7.4 Road side vending: an increasing variety of informal sector employmentNumber of Workers(in million)350
300
250200150100500246310133MaleFemale
129EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESBox 7.2: Informalisation in AhmedabadAhmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of morethan 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them.These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degreeof income security. They hadsecure jobs with a livingwage; they were covered by
social security schemesprotecting their health andold age. They had a strongtrade union which not onlyrepresented them in
disputes but also ranactivities for the welfare ofworkers and their families.In the early 1980s, textilemills all over the country
began to close down. In someplaces, such as Mumbai,the mills closed rapidly. InAhmedabad, the process ofclosure was long drawn out
and spread over 10 years.Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector.The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially
communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle
class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholismand suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work.Source: Renana Jhabvala, Ratna M. Sudarshan and Jeemol Unni  (Ed.) InformalEconomy at Centre Stage: New Structures of Employment, SagePublications, New Delhi, 2003, pp.265.Since the late 1970s, manydeveloping countries, including India,started paying attention to enterprisesand workers in the informal sector asemployment in the formal sector is notgrowing. Workers and enterprises in theinformal sector do not get regular income;they do not have any protection orregulation from the government. Workersare dismissed without any compensation.
Technology used in the informal sectorenterprises is outdated; they also do notmaintain any accounts. Workers of thissector live in slums and are squatters.
Of late, owing to the efforts of theInternational Labour Organisation (ILO),Change in the balance of power  in a house: anunemployed mill worker peeling garlic whereas his wife
has a new job of beedi rolling.
130INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTthe Indian government has initiated themodernisation of informal sectorenterprises and provision of social securitymeasures to informal sector
workers.7.8 UNEMPLOYMENTYou might have seen peoplelooking for jobs innewspapers. Some look for
a job  through friendsand relatives. In many
cities, you might find
people standing in someselect areas looking forpeople to employ themfor that day™s work. Somego to factories and offices
and give their bio-dataand ask whether there is any vacancy
in their factory or office. Many inthe rural areas do not go out andWork These OutTick (ü) mark against those which are in the informal sectorØWorker in a hotel which has seven hired workers and three family workersØA private school teacher in a school which has 25 teachersØA police constableØNurse in a government hospitalØCycle-rickshaw pullerØThe owner of a textile shop employing  nine workersØDriver of a bus company which has more than 10 buses with 20 drivers,conductors and other workersØCivil engineer working in a construction company which has 10 workersØComputer operator in the state government office working on a temporarybasisØA clerk in the electricity office.Fig. 7.5 Unemployed mill workers waiting for casual jobs
131EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESask for a job but stay home whenthere is no work. Some go toemployment exchanges and register
themselves for vacancies notifiedthrough employment exchanges. NSSOdefines unemployment as a situationin which all those who, owing to lackof work, are not working but
either seek work through employmentexchanges, intermediaries, friends orrelatives or by making applications toprospective employers or express theirwillingness or availability for work
under the prevailing condition of workand remunerations. There are a varietyof ways by which an unemployedperson is identified. Economists defineunemployed person as one who is not
able to get employment of even onehour in half a day.There are three sources of data onunemployment : Reports of Census ofIndia, National Sample Survey
Organisation™s Reports of Employmentand Unemployment Situation andDirectorate General ofEmployment and TrainingData of Registration withEmployment Exchanges.Though they providedifferent estimates ofunemployment, they do
provide us with theattributes of theunemployed and thevariety of unemploymentprevailing in our country.Do we have differenttypes of unemployment
in our economy? Thesituation described in thefirst paragraph of this section is calledopen unemployment. Economists callunemployment prevailing in Indianfarms as disguised unemployment.What is disguised unemployment?Suppose a farmer has four acres of land
and he actually needs only two workersand himself to carry out variousoperations on his farm in a year, but ifhe employs five workers and his family
members such as his wife and children,
this situation is known as disguisedunemployment. One study conductedin the late 1950s showed about one-third of agriculture workers in India asdisguisedly unemployed.You may have noticed that manypeople migrate to an urban area, pick
up a job and stay there for some time,but come back to their home villagesas soon as the rainy season begins.
Why do they do so? This is becausework in agriculture is seasonal; thereare no employment opportunities in thevillage for all months in the year. WhenFig. 7.6Sugar cane cutters: disguised unemployment is commonin farm works
132INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTthere is no work to do on farms, peoplego to urban areas and look for jobs.This kind of unemployment is knownas seasonal unemployment. This is alsoa common form of unemployment
prevailing in India.Though we have witnessed slowgrowth of employment, have you seenpeople being unemployed over a verylong time? Scholars says that in India,
people  cannot remain  completelyunemployed for very long because theirdesperate economic condition wouldnot allow them to be so. You will ratherfind them being forced to acceptjobs that nobody else would do,unpleasant or even dangerous jobs inunclean, unhealthy surroundings. Thecentral and state governments takemany initiatives and generateFig. 7.7Dam construction work is a direct way of employmentgeneration by the governmentemployment to facilitate adecent living for low
income families throughvarious measures. Thesewill be discussed in thefollowing section.7.9 GOVERNMENT ANDEMPLOYMENTGENERATIONYou may recall aboutthe National RuralEmployment GuaranteeAct 2005. It promises100 days of guaranteed
wage employment to allrural households whovolunteer to do unskilledmanual work. Thisscheme is one of the many measuresgovernments implement to generateemployment for those who are in needof jobs in rural areas.Since independence, the Union andstate governments have played
an important role in generatingemployment or creating opportunitiesfor employment generation. Theirefforts can be broadly categorised intotwo Š direct and indirect. In the first
category, as you have seen in thepreceding section, government employspeople in various departments foradministrative purposes. It also runsindustries, hotels and transport
companies and hence providesemployment directly to workers. Whenoutput of goods and services from
government enterprises increases, then
133EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESprivate enterprises which receive rawmaterials from government enterpriseswill also raise their output and henceincrease the number of employmentopportunities in the economy. For
example, when a government owned steelcompany increases its output, it will
result in direct increase in employment
in that government company.
Simultaneously, private companies,
which purchase steel from it, will also
increase their output and thus
employment. This is the indirectgeneration of employment opportunities
by the government initiatives in theeconomy.In Chapter 4, you would havenoticed that many programmes that
the governments implement, aimed at
alleviating poverty, are through
employment generation. They are
also known as employment
generation programmes. All these
programmes aim at providing not
only employment but also services in
areas such as primary health, primary
education,  rural drinking water,nutrition, assistance for people to buy
income and employment generating
assets, development of community
assets by generating wage
employment, construction of houses
and sanitation, assistance for
constructing houses, laying of rural
roads, development of wastelands/
degraded lands.7.10 CONCLUSIONThere has been a change in thestructure of workforce in India. Newlyemerging jobs are found mostly in theservice sector. The expansion of theservice sector and the advent of high
technology now frequently permit a
highly competitive existence for efficient
small scale and often individual
enterprises or specialist workers side by
side with the multinationals.
Outsourcing of work is becoming a
common practice. It means that a
big firm finds it profitable to close
down some of its specialist
departments (for example, legal or
computer programming or customer
service sections) and hand over a large
number of small piecemeal jobs to very
small enterprises or specialist
individuals, sometimes situated even in
other countries. The traditional notion
of the modern factory or office, as a
result, has been altering in such
a manner that for many the home
is becoming the workplace. All of
this change has not gone in favour
of the individual worker. The natureof employment has become more
informal with only limited availability
of social security measures to the
workers.In the last two decades, therehas been rapid growth in the gross
domestic product, but without
simultaneous increase in  employment
opportunities. This has forced the
government to take up initiatives in
generating employment opportunities
particularly in the rural areas.
134INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT1.Who is a worker?2.Define worker-population ratio.3.Are the following workers Š a beggar, a thief, a smuggler, a gambler?Why?RecapØAll those persons who are engaged in various economic activities andhence contribute to gross national product are workers.ØAbout two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various
economic activities.ØMen particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.ØMajority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers
and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the
proportion of India™s workforce.ØAbout three-fifth of India™s workforce depends on agriculture and otherallied activities as the major source of livelihood.ØIn recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.ØDuring post-reform period, India has been witness to employment
opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly inthe informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.ØGovernment is the major formal sector employer in the country.ØDisguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in ruralIndia.ØThere has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.ØThrough various schemes and policies, the government takes initiativesto generate employment directly and indirectly.EXERCISES
135EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES4.Find the odd man out (i) owner of a saloon (ii) a cobbler (iii) a cashierin Mother Dairy (iv)  a tuition master (v) transport operator(vi) construction worker.5.The newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the  sector(service/manufacturing).6.An establishement with four hired workers is known as (formal/informal) sector establishment.7.Raj is going to school. When he is not in school, you will find himworking in his farm. Can you consider him as a worker? Why?8.Compared to urban women, more rural women are found working.Why?9.Meena is a housewife. Besides taking care of household chores, she
works in the cloth shop which is owned and operated by her husband.Can she be considered as a worker? Why?10.Find the odd man out (i) rickshaw puller who works under a rick-shaw owner (ii) mason (iii) mechanic shop worker (iv) shoeshine boy.11.The following table shows distribution of workforce in India for the
year 1972-73. Analyse it and give reasons for the nature of workforcedistribution. You will notice that the data is pertaining to the situationin India 30 years ago!Place of ResidenceWorkforce (in millions)MaleFemaleTotalRural12569195Urban3273912.The following table shows the population and worker population ratiofor India in 1999-2000. Can you estimate the workforce (urban andtotal) for India?RegionEstimates ofWorkerEstimatedPopulationPopulation
No. of Workers(in crores)Ratio(in crores)Rural 71.8841.971.88 × 41.9 = 30.12Urban28.5233.7?Total100.4039.5?100
136INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT13.Why are regular salaried employees more in urban areas than inrural areas?14.Why are less women found in regular salaried employment?15.Analyse the recent trends in sectoral distribution of workforce in India.16.Compared to the 1970s, there has hardly been any change in thedistribution of workforce across various industries. Comment.17.Do you think that in the last 50 years, employment generated in thecountry is commensurate with the growth of GDP in India? How? 18.   Is it necessary to generate employment in the formal sector ratherthan in the informal sector? Why?19.Victor is able to get work only for two hours in a day. Rest of the day,
he is looking for work. Is he unemployed? Why? What kind of jobs
could persons like Victor be doing?20.You are residing in a village. If you are asked to advice the villagepanchayat, what kinds of activities would you suggest for theimprovement of your village which would also generate employment.21.Who is  a casual wage labourer?22.How will you know whether a worker is working in the informal sector?1.Select a region, say a street or colony, and divide it into 3-4sub-regions. Conduct a survey by which you can collect the details
of activity each person living there is engaged in. Derive the
worker-population ratio for all the regions. Interpret the results fordifferences in worker-population ratio for the different sub-regions.2.Suppose 3-4 groups of students are given different regions of a state.One region is mainly engaged in cultivation of paddy. In another region,coconut is the main plantation. The third region is a coastal regionwhere fishing is the main activity. The fourth region has a river nearby
with a lot of livestock rearing activities. Ask all the four groups to
develop a report on what kind of employment could be generated inthe four regions.3.Visit the local library and ask for Employment News, a weekly publishedby the Government of India. Go through each issue for the last two
months. There will be seven issues. Select 25 advertisements andSUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
137EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUESfill in the following table (expand the table as needed). Discuss thenature of jobs in the classroom.ItemsAdvertisement 1       Advertisement 21.Name of Office2.Department/company3.Private/public/joint venture4.Name of the post5.SectorŠprimary/seconday/service6.Number of posts/vacancies7.Qualification required4.You might notice, in your locality, a variety of works being done bythe  government, for example laying of roads, desilting of tanks,
construction of school buildings, hospital and other governmentoffices, construction of check dams and houses for the poor etc.Prepare a critical assessment report on one such activity. The issuescovered could be the following (i) how the work was identified (ii)amount sanctioned (iii) contribution of local people, if any (iv) number
of persons involved Š both men and women (v) wages paid (vi) is itreally required in that area and other critical comments on theimplementation of the scheme under which the work is being carriedout.5.In recent years, you may have noticed that many voluntaryorganisations also take initiatives to generate employment in hillyand dry land regions. If you find such initiatives in your locality, visitand prepare a report.CHADHA, G.K. and P.P. SAHU, 2002. ‚Post-reform Setbacks in Rural Employment:Issues that need further scrutiny.™ Economic and Political Weekly, May25, pp.1998-2026.DESAI, S and M.B.DAS. 2004. ‚Is Employment Driving India™s Growth Surge™,Economic and Political Weekly, July 3, pp. 3045-3051.GHOSE, AJIT K. 1999. ‚Current Issues of Employment Policy in India.™ Economicand Political Weekly, September 4, pp. 2592-2608.HIRWAY
, INDIRA. 2002. ‚Employment and Unemployment Situation in 1990s:How Good are NSS Data.™ Economic and Political Weekly, May 25,pp. 2027-2036.REFERENCES
138INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTJACOB, PAUL. 1986. ‚Concept of ‚work™ and estimates of ‚workforce™ Š Anappraisal of the treatment of activities relating to non-marketed output,™Sarvekshana, Vol.IX, No.4, April.KULSHRESHTHA, A.C., GULAB SINGH, ALOK KAR and R.L. MISHRA. 2000. ‚Workforce inthe Indian National Accounts Statistics,™ The Journal of Income and Wealth,Vol.22, No.2, July, pp. 3-39.PRADHAN, B.K. and M.R.SALUJA. 1996. ‚Labour Statistics in India: A Review.™Margin, July- September, Vol.28, Number 4, pp. 319-347.RATH, NILAKANTHA. 2001. ‚Data on Employment, Unemployment and Education:Where to go from here?™ Economic and Political Weekly, June 9,pp. 2081-2087.SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‚Employment-Unemployment Situation in the Nineties:Some Results from NSS 55th Round Survey™, Economic and PoliticalWeekly, March 17, pp. 931-940.SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‚Employment and Poverty in 1990s: Further Results fromNSS 55th Round Employment-Unemployment Survey, 1999-2000,™
Economic and Political Weekly, August 11, pp. 3039-3049.VISARIA, PRAVIN. 1996. ‚Structure of the Indian Workforce, 1961-1994,™ TheIndian Journal of Labour Economics, Vol.39, No.4, pp. 725-740.Government ReportsAnnual Reports, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Delhi.Census of India 2011, Primary Census Abstract, Registrar General of CensusOperations, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Delhi.Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.Reports on Employment and Unemployment Situation in India, Ministry ofStatistics and Planning, Government of India.Websiteswww.censusofindia.nic.inwww.mospi.nic.in
