CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THEINDIAN ECONOMYUNITIIIUNITIII
Some of the most challenging issues facing Indiatoday are poverty, development of rural India and
building infrastructure. We are a billion-strongcountry today and our human capital is the biggest
asset; it needs investment in health and education.
We also need to understand the concept ofemployment and the need for  creating more
employment in our country. We will also look atthe implications of development on our environment
and call for sustainable development. There is a
need to critically assess government initiatives intackling all  these issues each of which has been
taken up separately in this unit.
 After studying this chapter, the learners will·understand the various attributes of poverty ·comprehend the diverse dimensions relating to the concept of poverty ·critically appreciate the way poverty is estimated ·appreciate and be able to assess existing poverty alleviation programmes.POVERTY4
60INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT4.1 INTRODUCTIONIn previous chapters, you havestudied the economic policies thatIndia has taken in the last six and ahalf decades and the outcome ofthese policies with relation to thevarious developmental indicators.Providing minimum basic needs tothe people and reduction of povertyhave been the major aims of
independent India. The pattern ofdevelopment that the successive fiveyear plans envisaged laid emphasison the upliftment of the poorest of
the poor (Antyodaya), integrating thepoor into the mainstream andachieving a minimum standard ofliving for all.While addressing the ConstituentAssembly in 1947,  Jawaharlal Nehruhad said, ﬁThis achievement(Independence) is but a step, anopening of opportunity, to the great
triumphs and achievements thatawait us– the ending of poverty andignorance and disease and inequalityof opportunity.ﬂHowever we need to know wherewe stand today. Poverty is not only achallenge for India, as more than one-
fifth of the world™s poor live in Indiaalone; but also for the world, where
about 300 million people are not ableto meet their basic needs.Poverty has many faces, whichhave been changing from place toplace and across time, and has been
described in many ways. Most often,
poverty is a situation that peoplewant to escape. So poverty is a call
to action Š for the poor and thewealthy alike Š a call to change theworld so that many more may have
enough to eat, adequate shelter,access to education and health,
protection from violence, and a voicein what happens in theircommunities.To know what helps to reducepoverty, what works and what does
not, what changes over time, povertyhas to be defined, measured andstudied Š and even experienced. Aspoverty has many dimensions, it hasto be looked at through a variety ofindicators Š levels of income andconsumption, social indicators, and
indicators of vulnerability to risks
and of socio/political access.4.2 WHO ARE THE POOR?You would have noticed that in alllocalities and neighbourhoods, bothin rural and urban areas, there aresome of us who are poor and somewho are rich. Read the story of Anuand Sudha.  Their lives are examples
of the two extremes (see Box 4.1).There are also people who belong tothe many stages in between.Push cart vendors, streetcobblers, women who string flowers,No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greaterpart of the members are poor and miserable.Adam Smith
