10BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSPLANT KINGDOMMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Cyanobacteria are classified under
a.Protista
b.Plantae
c.Monera
d.Algae
2.Fusion of two gametes which are dissimilar in size is termed as
a.Oogamy
b.Isogamy
c.Anisogamy
d.Zoogamy
3.Holdfast, stipe and frond constitutes the plant body in case of
a.Rhodophyceae
b.Chlorophyceae
c.Phaeophyceae
d.All of the above
4.A plant shows thallus level of organization. It shows rhizoids and is
haploid. It needs water to complete its life cycle because the male gametesare motile. Identify the group to which it belongs toa.Pteridophytes
b.Gymnosperms
c.Monocots
d.Bryophytes
5.A Prothallus is
a.A structure in pteridophytes formed before the thallus develops
b.A sporophytic free living structure formed in pteridophytes
CHAPTER 3
11UNIT I: DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLDPLANT KINGDOM11111111111111c.A gametophyte free living structure formed in pteridophytes
d.A primitive structure formed after fertilization in pteridophytes
6.Plants of this group are diploid and well adapted to extreme conditions.
They grow bearing sporophylls in compact structures called cones. Thegroup in reference isa.Monocots
b.Dicots
c.Pteridophytes
d.Gymnosperms
7.The embryo sac of an Angiosperm is made up of
a.8 cells
b.7 cells and 8 nuclei
c.8 nuclei
d.7 cells and 7 nuclei
8.If the diploid number of a flowering plant is 36. What would be the
chromosome number in its endosperma.36
b.18
c.54
d.72
9.Protonema is
a.Haploid and is found in mosses
b.Diploid and is found in liverworts
c.Diploid and is found in pteridophytes
d.Haploid and is found in pteridophytes
10.The giant Redwood tree (
Sequoia sempervirens) is a/ana.Angiosperm
b.Free fern
c.Pteridophyte
d.Gymnosperm
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Food is stored as Floridean starch in Rhodophyceae. Mannitol is the
reserve food material of which group of algae?
12BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS2.Give an example of plants with
a.Haplontic life cycle
b.Diplontic life cycle
c.Haplo- diplontic life cycle
3.The plant body in higher plants is well differentiated and well developed.
Roots are the organs used for the purpose of absorption. What is theequivalent of roots in the less developed lower plants?4.Most algal genera show haplontic life style. Name an alga which is
a.Haplo-diplontic
b.Diplontic
5.In Bryophytes male and female sex organs are called ____________ and
__________.SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Why are bryophytes called the amphibians of the plant kingdom?
2.The male and female reproductive organs of several pteridophytes and
gymnosperms are comparable to floral structures of angiosperms. Makean attempt to compare the various reproductive parts of  pteridophytesand gymnosperms with reproductive structures of angiosperms.3.Heterospory i.e., formation of two types of spores Œ microspores and
megaspores is a characteristic feature in the life cycle of a few membersof pteridophytes and all spermatophytes. Do you think heterospory has
some evolutionary significance in plant kingdom?4.How far does 
Selaginella one of the few living members of lycopodiales(pteridophytes) fall short of seed habit.5.Each plant or group of plants has some phylogenetic significance in
relation to evolution : Cycas, one of the few living members ofgymnosperms is called as the ‚relic of past™. Can you establish aphylogenetic relationship of Cycas with any other group of plants thatjustifies the above statement?
13UNIT I: DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLDPLANT KINGDOM131313131313136.The heterosporous pteridophytes show certain characteristics, which
are precursor to the seed habit in gymnosperms. Explain.7.Comment on the lifecycle and nature of a fern prothallus.
8.How are the male and female gametophytes of pteridophytes and
gymnosperms different from each other?9.In which plant will you look for mycorrhiza and corolloid roots? Also
explain what these terms mean.LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Gametophyte is a dominant phase in the life cycle of a bryophyte. Explain.
2.With the help of a schematic diagram describe the haplo-diptontic life
cycle pattern of a plant group.3.Lichen is usually cited as an example of ‚symbiosis™ in plants where an
algal and a fungal species live together for their mutual benefit. Which ofthe following will happen if algal and fungal partners are separated fromeach other?a.Both will survive and grow normally and independent from each
other.
b.Both will die
c.Algal component will survive while the fungal component will die.
d.Fungal component will survive while algal partner will die.
Based on your answer how do you justify this association as symbiosis.4.Explain why sexual reproduction in angiosperms is said to take place
through double fertilization and triple fusion. Also draw a labelleddiagram of embryo sac to explain the phenomena.5.Draw labelled diagrams of
a.Female and male thallus of a liverwort.
b.Gametophyte and sporophyte of 
Funaria.c.Alternation of generation in Angiosperm.

