114BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSCHAPTER 20LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENTMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Match the following and mark the correct option
Column I   Column II
A.Fast muscle 
fibresi.
MyoglobinB.Slow muscle fi
bresii.La
ctic acidC.Actin filament
iii.Contractile unitD.Sarcomereiv.
I-bandOptions:a.A-i, B-ii, C-iv, D-iii
b.A-ii, B-i, C-iii, D-iv
c.A-ii, B-i, C-iv, D-iii
d.A-iii, B-ii, C-iv, D-i
2.Ribs are attached to
a.Scapula
b.Sternum
c.Clavicle
d.Ilium
3.What is the type of movable joint present between the atlas and axis?
a.Pivot
b.Saddle
c.Hinge
d.Gliding
4.ATPase of the muscle is located in
a.Actinin
b.Troponin
c.Myosin
d.Actin

115115115115115115115115115115115115LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT5.Intervertebral disc is found in the vertebral column of
a.Birds
b.Reptiles
c.Mammals
d.Amphibians
6.Which one of the following is showing the correct sequential order of
vertebrae in the vertebral column of human beings?a.Cervical Š lumbar Š thoracic Š sacral Š coccygeal
b.Cervical Š thoracic Š sacral Š lumbar Š coccygeal
c.Cervical Š sacral Š thoracic Š lumbar Š coccygeal
d.Cervical Š thoracic Š lumbar Š sacral Š coccygeal
7.Which one of the following options is incorrect?
a.Hinge joint Œ between Humerus and Pectoral girdle
b.Pivot joint Œ between atlas, axis and occipital condyle
c.Gliding joint Œ between the carpals
d.Saddle joint Œ between carpel and metacarpals of thumb
8.Knee joint and elbow joints are examples of
a.Saddle joint
b.Ball and socket joint
c.Pivot joint
d.Hinge joint
9.Macrophages and leucocytes exhibit
a.Ciliary movement
b.Flagellar movement
c.Amoeboid movement
d.Gliding movement
10.Which one of the following is not a disorder of bone?
a.Arthritis
b.Osteoporosis
c.Rickets
d.Atherosclerosis
11.Which one of the following statement is incorrect?
a.Heart muscles are striated and involuntary
b.The muscles of hands and legs are striated and voluntary
c.The muscles located in the inner walls of alimentary canal are
striated and involuntary
116BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSd.Muscles located in the reproductive tracts are unstriated and
involuntary12.Which one of the following statements is true:
a.Head of humerus bone articulates with acetabulum of pectoral
girdle.b.Head of humerus bone articulates with glenoid cavity of pectoral
girdle.c.Head of humerus bone articulates with a cavity called acetabulum
of pelvic girdle.d.Head of humerus bone articulates with a glenoid cavity of pelvic
girdle.13.Muscles with characteristic striations and involuntary are
a.Muscles in the wall of alimentary canal
b.Muscles of the heart
c.Muscles assisting locomotion
d.Muscles of the eyelids
14.Match the followings and mark the correct option
Column IColumn II
A.Sternumi.
Synovial fluidB.Glenoid Cavity     ii.Vertebrae
C.Freely movable joint
iii.Pectoral girdleD.Cartilagenous 
jointiv.Flat bones
Options:a.A-ii, B-i, C-iii, D-iv
b.A-iv, B-iii, C-i, D-ii
c.A-ii, B-i, C-iv, D-iii
d.A-iv, B-i, C-ii, D-iv
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Name the cells/tissues in human body which
a.exhibit ameboid movement
b.exhibit ciliary movement
2.Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular, _____,
_______ systems
117117117117117117117117117117117117LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT3.Sarcolemma, sarcoplasm and sarcoplasmic reticulum refer to a particular
type of cell in our body. Which is this cell and to what parts of that celldo these names refer to?4.Label the different components of actin filament in the diagram given
below.5.The three tiny bones present in middle ear are called ear ossicles. Write
them in correct sequence begining from ear drum.6.What is the difference between the matrix of bones and cartilage?
7.Which tissue is afflicted by Myasthenia gravis? What is the underlying
cause?8.How do our bone joints function without grinding noise and pain?
9.Give the location of a ball and socket joint in a human body
10.Our fore arm is made of three different bones. Comment.
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.With respect to rib cage, explain the following:
a.Bicephalic ribs
b.True ribs
c.Floating ribs
2.In old age, people often suffer from stiff and inflamed joints. What is this
condition called? What are the possible reasons for these symptoms?3.Exchange of calcium between bone and extracellular fluid takes place
under the influence of certain hormonesa.What will happen if more of Ca
++ is in extracellular fluid?b.What will happen if very less amount of Ca
++ is in the extracellularfluid?
118BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS4.Name atleast two hormones which result in fluctuation of Ca++ level.
5.Rahul exercises regularly by visiting a gymnasium. Of late he is gaining
weight. What could be the reason? Choose the correct answer andelaborate.a.Rahul has gained weight due to accumulation of fats in body.
b.Rahul has gained weight due to increased muscle and less of fat.
c.Rahul has gained weight because his muscle shape has improved.
d.Rahul has gained weight because he is accumulating water in the
body.6.Radha was running on a treadmill at a great speed for 15 minutes
continuously. She stopped the treadmill and abruptly came out. Forthe next few minutes, she was breathing heavily/fast. Answer the followingquestions.a.What happened to her muscles when she did strenuously
exercised?b.How did her breathing rate change?
7.Write a few lines about Gout.
8.What is the source of energy for muscle contraction?
9.What are the points for articulation of Pelvic and Pectoral girdles?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Calcium ion concentration in blood affects muscle contraction. Does it
lead to tetany in certain cases? How will you correlate fluctuation inblood calcium with tetany?2.An elderly woman slipped in the bathroom and had severe pain in her
lower back. After X-ray examination doctors told her it is due to a slippeddisc. What does that mean? How does it affect our health?3.Explain sliding filament theory of muscle contraction with neat sketches.
4.How does a muscle shorten during its contraction and return to its
original form during relaxation?5.Discuss the role of Ca
2+ ions in muscle contraction. Draw neat sketchesto illustrate your answer. 6.Differentiate between Pectoral and Pelvic girdle.

