6BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSCHAPTER 2BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.All eukaryotic unicellular organisms belong to
a.Monera
b.Protista
c.Fungi
d.Bacteria
2.The five kingdom classification was proposed by
a.R.H. Whittaker
b.C.Linnaeus
c.A. Roxberg
d.Virchow
3.Organisms living in salty areas are called as
a.Methanogens
b.Halophiles
c.Heliophytes
d.Thermoacidophiles
4.Naked cytoplasm, multinucleated and saprophytic are the characteristics of
a.Monera
b.Protista
c.Fungi
d.Slime molds
5.An association between roots of higher plants and fungi is called
a.Lichen
b.Fern

UNIT I: DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD77777777BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATIONc.Mycorrhiza
d.BGA
6.A dikaryon is formed when
a.Meiosis is arrested
b.The two haploid cells do not fuse immediately
c.Cytoplasm does not fuse
d.None of the above
7.Contagium vivum fluidum was proposed bya.D.J. Ivanowsky
b.M.W. Beijerinek
c.Stanley
d.Robert Hook
8.Mycobiont and Phycobiont are found in
a.Mycorrhiza
b.Root
c.Lichens
d.BGA
9.Difference between Virus and Viroid is
a.Absence of protein coat in viroid but present in virus
b.Presence of low molecular weight RNA in virus but absent in viroid
c.Both a and b
d.None of the above
10.With respect to fungal sexual cycle, choose the correct sequence of
eventsa.Karyogamy, Plasmogamy and Meiosis
b.Meiosis, Plasmogamy and Karyogamy
c.Plasmogamy, Karyogamy and Meiosis
d.Meiosis, Karyogamy and Plasmogamy
11.Viruses are non-cellular organisms but replicate themselves once they infect
the host cell. To which of the following kingdom do viruses belong to?a.Monera
b.Protista
c.Fungi
d.None of the above

8BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS12.Members of phycomycetes are found in
i.Aquatic habitats
ii.On decaying wood
iii.Moist 
and damp placesiv.As obligate parasites on plants
Choose from the following optionsa.None of the above
b.i and iv
c.ii and iii
d.All of the above
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.What is the principle underlying the use of cyanobacteria in agricultural
fields for crop improvement?2.Suppose you accidentally find an old preserved permanent slide without
a label. In your effort to identify it, you place the slide under microscopeand observe the following features :-a.Unicellular
b.Well defined nucleus
c.BiflagellateŒone flagellum lying longitudinally and the other
transversely.What would you identify it as? Can you name the kingdom it belongsto?3.How is the fiveŒkingdom classification advantageous over the two-
kingdom classification?4.Polluted water bodies have usually very high abundance of plants like
Nostoc and Oscillitoria. Give reasons.5.Are chemosynthetic bacteria-autotrophic or heterotrophic?
6.The common name of pea is simpler than its botanical (scientific) name
Pisum satirum. Why then is the simpler common name not used insteadof the complex scientific/ botanical name in biology?7.A virus is considered as a living organism and an obligate parasite
when inside a host cell. But virus is not classified along with bacteriaor fungi. What are the characters of virus that are similar to non-livingobjects?8.In the five kingdom system of Whittaker, how many kingdoms are
eukaryotes?
UNIT I: DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD99999999BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATIONSHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Diatoms are also called as ‚pearls of ocean™, why? What is diatomaceous
earth?2.There is a myth that immediately after heavy rains in forest, mushrooms
appear in large number and make a very large ring or circle, which maybe several metres in diam
eter. 
These are called as ‚
Fairy rings™. Can youexplain this myth of fairy rings in biological terms?3.Neurospora - an ascomycetes fungus has been used as a biological toolto understand the mechanism of plant genetics much in the same wayas Drosophila has been used to study animal genetics. What makesNeurospora so important as a genetic tool?4.Cyanobacteria and heterotrophic bacteria have been clubbed together
in Eubacteria of kingdom Monera as per the ﬁFive Kingdom
Classificationﬂ even though the two are vastly differ
ent from each other.
Is this grouping of the two types of taxa in the same kingdom justified?If so, why?5.At a stage of their cycle, ascomycetes fungi produce the fruiting bodies
like apothecium, perithecium or cleistothecium. How are these threetypes of fruiting bodies different from each other?6.What observable features in 
Trypanosoma 
would make you classify itunder kingdom Protista?7.Fungi are cosmopolitan, write the role of fungi in your daily life.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Algae are known to reproduce asexually by variety of spores under
different environmental conditions. Name these spores and the conditionsunder which they are produced.2.Apart from chlorophyll, algae have several other pigments in their
chloroplast. What pigments are found in blue-green, red and brownalgae that are responsible for their characteristic colours?3.Make a list of algae and fungi that have commercial value as source of
food, chemicals, medicines and fodder.
4.‚Peat™ is an important source of domestic fuel in several countries. How
is ‚peat™ formed in nature?5.Biological classification is a dynamic and ever evolving phenomenon
which keeps changing with our understanding of life forms. Justify thestatement taking any two examples.
