Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics38MCQ I6.1An electron and a proton are moving under the influence of mutualforces. In calculating the change in the kinetic energy of the systemduring motion, one ignores the magnetic force of one on another.

This is because,(a)the two magnetic forces are equal and opposite, so they produce
no net effect.(b)the magnetic forces do no work on each particle.
(c)the magnetic forces do equal and opposite (but non-zero) work
on each particle.(d)the magenetic forces are necessarily negligible.
6.2A proton is kept at rest. A positively charged particle is releasedfrom rest at a distance d in its field. Consider two experiments;one in which the charged particle is also a proton and in another,
a positron. In the same time t, the work done on the two movingcharged particles isChapter SixWORK, ENERGYAND POWER
Work, Energy and Power39(a)same as the same force  law is involved in the two experiments.
(b)less for the case of a positron, as the positron moves away
more rapidly and the force on it weakens.(c)more for the case of a positron, as the positron moves away a
larger distance.(d)same as the work done by charged particle on the stationary proton.
6.3A man squatting on the ground gets straight up and stand. Theforce of reaction of ground on the man during the process is(a)constant and equal to 
mg in magnitude.(b)constant and greater than 
mg in magnitude.(c)variable but always greater than 
mg.(d)at first greater than 
mg, and later becomes equal to mg.6.4A bicyclist comes to a skidding stop in 10 m. During this process,
the force on the bicycle due to the road is 200N and is directlyopposed to the motion. The work done by the cycle on the road is(a)+ 2000J
(b)Œ 200J

(c)zero

(d)Œ 20,000J
6.5A body is falling freely under the action of gravity alone in vacuum.Which of the following quantities remain constant during the fall?(a)Kinetic energy.
(b)Potential energy.
(c)Total mechanical energy.
(d)Total linear momentum.
6.6During inelastic collision between two bodies, which of the following
quantities always remain conserved?(a)Total kinetic energy.
(b)Total mechanical energy.
(c)Total linear momentum.
(d)Speed of each body.
6.7Two inclined frictionless tracks, one gradual and the othersteep meet at A from where two stones are allowed to
slide down from rest, one on each track as shown in Fig.6.1.Which of the following statement is correct?(a)Both the stones reach the bottom at the same time
but not with the same speed.(b)Both the stones reach the bottom with the same speed
and stone I reaches the bottom earlier than stone II.Fig. 6.1
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics40(c)Both the stones reach the bottom with the same speed and
stone II reaches the bottom  earlier than stone I.(d)Both the stones reach the bottom at different times and with
different speeds.6.8The potential energy function for a particle executing linear SHMis given by 21()2Vxkx
 where k is the force constant of theoscillator (Fig. 6.2). For k = 0.5N/m, the graph of V(x) versus x isshown in the figure. A particle of total energy E turns back whenit reaches 
mxx. If V and K indicate the P.E. and K.E.,
respectively of the particle at x = +xm, then which of the following iscorrect?(a)V = O,K = E(b)V = E,K = O(c)V < E,K = O(d)V = O,K < E.6.9Two identical ball bearings in contact with each other and restingon a frictionless table are hit head-on by another ball bearing of thesame mass moving initially with a speed V as shown in Fig. 6.3.Fig. 6.2Fig. 6.3Fig. 6.4(a)(b)
(c)(d)
If the collision is elastic, which of the following (Fig. 6.4) is a possibleresult after collision?
Work, Energy and Power416.10A body of mass 0.5 kg travels in a straight line with velocity v = ax3/2 where a = 5 mŒ1/2sŒ1. The work done by the net force during itsdisplacement from x = 0 to x = 2 m is(a)1.5 J
(b)50 J
(c)10 J

(d)100 J
6.11A body is moving unidirectionally under the influence of a source of
constant power  supplying energy. Which of the diagrams shown inFig. 6.5 correctly shows the displacement-time curve for its motion?
Fig. 6.6tK.E(d)(a)(b)(c)Fig. 6.5(a)(b)
(c)(d)
6.12Which of the diagrams shown in Fig. 6.6 most closely shows thevariation in kinetic energy of the earth as it moves once aroundthe sun in its elliptical orbit?
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics42(a)tKEPEh6.13Which of the diagrams shown in Fig. 6.7 represents variation oftotal mechanical energy of a pendulum oscillating in air as

function of time?(d)Fig. 6.7tEtE(b)tEtE(a)(c)6.14A mass of 5 kg is moving along a circular path of radius 1 m. Ifthe mass moves with 300 revolutions per minute, its kinetic energy
would be(a)250
2(b)100
2(c)5
2(d)0
6.15A raindrop falling from a height h above ground, attains a near terminalvelocity when it has fallen through a height (3/4)
h. Which of thediagrams shown in Fig. 6.8 correctly shows the change in kinetic and

potential energy of the drop during its fall up to the ground?
thh/4KEPE(b)
Work, Energy and Power436.16In a shotput event an athlete throws the shotput of mass 10 kgwith an initial speed of 1m s Œ1 at 45° from a height 1.5 m above
ground. Assuming air resistance to be negligible and acceleration

due to gravity to be 10 m s Œ2 , the kinetic energy of the shotputwhen it just reaches the ground will be(a)2.5  J
(b)5.0  J
(c)52.5  J

(d)155.0 J
6.17Which of the diagrams in Fig. 6.9 correctly shows the change inkinetic energy of an iron sphere fallin
g freely in a lake having
sufficient depth to impart it a terminal velocity?thKEPEthKEPE(c)(d)Fig. 6.8(a)(b)(d)Fig. 6.9K.EdepthK.EdepthK.EdepthK.Edepth(c)
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics446.18A cricket ball of mass 150 g moving with a speed of 126 km/h hitsat the middle of the bat, held firmly at its position by the batsman.

The ball moves straight back to the bowler after hitting the bat.Assuming that collision between ball and bat is completely elasticand the two remain in contact for 0.001s, the force that the batsman
had to apply to hold the bat firmly at its place would be
(a)10.5 N
(b)21 N

(c)1.05 ×10
4 N(d)2.1 × 10
4 NMCQ II6.19A man, of mass m, standing at the bottom of the staircase, of heightL climbs it and stands at its top.(a)Work done by all
 forces on man is equal to the rise in potential
energy 
mgL.(b)Work done by 
all forces on man is zero.
(c)Work done by the gravitational force on man is 
mgL.(d)The r
eaction force from a 
step does not do work because thepoint of application of the force does not move while the force
exists.6.20A bullet of mass 
m fired at 30
° to the horizontal leaves the barrel of
the gun with a velocity v. The bullet hits a soft target at a height 
habove the ground while it is 
moving downward 
and emerges out
with half the kinetic energy it 
had before hittin
g the target.
Which of the following statements are correct in respect of bullet
after it emerges out 
of the target?
(a)The velocity of the bullet will be reduced to half its initial
value.(b)The velocity of the bullet will be more than half of its earlier
velocity.(c)The bullet will continue to move along the same parabolic
path.(d)The bullet will move in a different parabolic path.
(e)The bullet will fall vertically downward after hitting the tar
get.(f)The internal energy of the particles of the target will increase.
6.21Two blocks M1 and M2 having equal mass are free to move on ahorizontal frictionless surface. M2 is attached to a massless springas  shown in Fig. 6.10. Iniially M2 is at rest and M1 is moving towardM2 with speed v and collides head-on with 
M2.(a)While spring is fully compressed all the KE of 
M1is stored as PE of spring.
Work, Energy and Power45(b)While spring is fully compressed the system
momentum is not conserved, though finalmomentum is equal to initial momentum.(c)If spring is massless, the final state of the 
M1 isstate of rest.(d)If the surface on which blocks are moving has
friction, then collision cannot be elastic.VSA6.22A rough inclined plane is placed on a cart moving with a constant
velocity u on horizontal ground. A block of mass M rests on theincline. Is any work done by force of friction between the blockand incline? Is there then a dissipation of energy?6.23Why is electrical power required at all when the elevator isdescending? Why should there be a limit on the number of
passengers in this case?6.24A body is being raised to a height h from the surface of earth.What is the sign of work done by(a)applied force
(b)gravitational force?
6.25Calculate the work done by a car against gravity in moving alonga straight horizontal road. The mass of the car is 400 kg and the
distance moved is 2m.6.26A body falls towards earth in air. Will its total mechanical energy

be conserved during the fall? Justify.6.27A body is moved along a closed loop. Is the work done in moving
the body necessarily zero? If not, state the condition under which
work done over a closed path is always zero.6.28In an elastic collision of two billiard balls, which of the following
quantities remain conserved during the short time of collision ofthe balls (i.e., when they are in contact).(a)Kinetic energy.
(b)Total linear momentum?
Give reason for your answer in each case.6.29Calculate the power of a crane in watts, which lifts a mass of100 kg to a height of 10 m in 20s.Fig. 6.10
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics466.30The average work done by a human heart while it beats once is 0.5
J. Calculate the power used by heart if it beats 72 times in a minute.
6.31Give example of a situation in which an applied force does not
result in a change in kinetic energy.
6.32Two bodies of unequal mass are moving in the same direction

with equal kinetic energy. The two bodies are brought to rest by
applying retarding force of same magnitude. How would the

distance moved by them before coming to rest compare?
6.33A bob of mass m suspended by a light string of length L is whirledinto a vertical circle as shown in Fig. 6.11. What will be the
trajectory of the particle if the string is cut at(a)Point B?
(b)Point C?

(c) Point X?
SAFig. 6.11xBALCmFig. 6.12V(x)AEoxDCBF6.34A graph of potential energy V ( x )verses x is shown in Fig. 6.12.A particle of energy E0 is executingmotion in it. Draw graph of velocityand kinetic energy versus x for onecomplete cycle AFA.6.35A ball of mass m, moving with a speed2v0, collides inelastically (e > 0) with an identical ball  at rest. Showthat(a)For head-on collision, both the balls move forward.
(b)For a general collision, the angle between the two velocities of
scattered balls is less than 90°.6.36Consider a one-dimensional motion of a particle with total energy
E. There are four r
egions A, B, C and D in which  the relationbetween potential energy 
V, 
kinetic energy 
(K) and total energy
E is as given below:Region A : V > ERegion B : V < ERegion C : K > ERegion D : V > KState with reason in each case whether a particle can be found inthe given region or not.
Work, Energy and Power476.37The bob A of a pendulum released from horizontal tothe vertical hits another bob B of the same mass atrest on a table as shown in Fig. 6.13.If the length of the pendulum is 1m, calculate(a)the height to which bob A will rise after collision.
(b)the speed with which bob B starts moving.
Neglect the size of the bobs and assume the collisionto be elastic.6.38A raindrop of mass 1.00 g falling from a height of 1 km hits theground with a speed of 50 m sŒ1. Calculate
(a)the loss of P.E. of the drop.
(b)the gain in K.E. of the drop.
(c)Is the gain in K.E. equal to loss of P.E.? If not why.
Take -2=10ms
g6.39Two pendulums with identical bobs and lengths  are suspendedfrom a common support such that in rest position the two bobs
are in contact (Fig. 6.14). One of the bobs is released after beingdisplaced by 10o so that it collides elastically head-on with theother bob.(a)Describe the motion of two bobs.
(b)Draw a graph showing variation in energy of either pendulum
with time, for 02tT, where T is the period of eachpendulum.6.40Suppose the average mass of raindrops is 3.0 × 10-5kg and theiraverage terminal velocity 9 m s-1. Calculate the energy transferredby rain to each square metre of the surface at a place which receives100 cm of rain in a year.
6.41An engine is attached to a wagon through a shock absorber of length1.5m. The system with a total mass of 50,000 kg is moving with aspeed of 36 km h-1 when the brakes are applied to bring it to rest. Inthe process of the system being brought to rest, the spring of theshock absorber gets compressed by 1.0 m. If 90% of energy of thewagon is lost due to friction, calculate the spring constant.6.42An adult weighing 600N raises the centre of gravity of his body by0.25 m while taking each step of 1 m length in jogging. If  he jogs
for 6 km, calculate the energy utilised by him in jogging assumingthat there is no energy loss due to friction of ground and air.

Assuming that the body of the adult is capable of converting 10%of energy intake in the form of food, calculate the energy equivalentsFig. 6.14Fig. 6.131mmAmB
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics48of food that would be required to compensate energy utilised forjogging.6.43On complete combustion a litre of petrol gives off  heat equivalentto 3×107 J. In a test drive a car weighing 1200 kg. including the
mass of driver, runs 15 km per litre while moving with a uniform
speed on a straight track. Assuming that friction offered by the

road surface and air to be uniform, calculate the force of friction

acting on the car during the test drive, if the efficiency of the car
engine were 0.5.
LA6.44A block of mass 1 kg is pushed up a surface inclined to horizontalat an angle of 30° by a force of 10 N parallel  to the inclinedsurface (Fig. 6.15).The coefficient of friction between block and
the incline is 0.1. If the block is pushed up by 10 m along the
incline, calulate(a)work done against gravity
(b)work done against force of friction
(c)increase in potential energy
(d)increase in kinetic energy

(e)work done by applied force.
6.45A curved surface is shown in Fig. 6.16. The portion BCD is free
of friction. There are three spherical balls of identical radii and
masses. Balls are rel
eased from rest one by one from A which is
at a slightly greater height than C.Fig. 6.16ABCDFig. 6.1530omFWith the surface AB, ball 1 has large enough friction to causerolling down without slipping; ball 2 has a small friction and ball

3 has a negligible friction.(a)For which balls is total mechanical energy conserved?
(b)Which ball (s) can reach D?
(c)For balls which do not reach D, which of the balls can reach
back A?
Work, Energy and Power496.46A rocket accelerates straight up by ejecting gas downwards. In asmall time interval t, it ejects a gas of mass m at a relativespeed u. Calculate KE of the entire system at t +t and t andshow that the device that ejects gas does work = 212mu inthis time interval (neglect gravity).6.47Two identical steel cubes (masses 50g, side 1cm) collidehead-on face to face with a speed of 10cm/s each. Findthe maximum compression of each. Young™s modulus for
steel = Y= 2 × 1011 N/m2.6.48A baloon filled with helium rises against gravity increasing its
potential energy. The speed of the baloon also increases as itrises. How do you reconcile this with the law of conservation ofmechanical energy? You can neglect viscous drag of air and
assume that density of air is constant.
