6363636363MINERAL NUTRITION63636363636363MINERAL NUTRITIONMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Which one of the following roles is not characteristic of an essential
element?a.being a component of biomolecules
b.changing the chemistry of soil
c.being a structural component of energy related chemical
compoundsd.activation or inhibition of enzymes
2.Which one of the following statements can best explain the term critical
concentration of an essential element?a.essential element concentration below which plant growth is
retarded.b.essential element concentration below which plant growth becomes
stunted.c.essential element concentration below which plant remains in the
vegetative phase.d.none of the above
3.Deficiency symptoms of an element tend to appear first in young leaves.
It indicates that the element is relatively immobile. Which one of thefollowing elemental deficiency would show such symptoms?a.sulphur
b.magnesium
c.nitrogen
d.potassium
4.Which one of the following symptoms is not due to manganese toxicity
in plants?a.Calcium translocation in shoot apex is inhibited
CHAPTER 12
64BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSb.Deficiency in both Iron and Nitrogen is induced
c.Appearance of brown spot surrounded by chlorotic veins
d.None of the above
5.Reaction carried out by N
2 fixing microbes includea.2NH
3 + 3O2   2NO2Œ + 2H+ + 2H2O (i)b.2NO
2- + O2    2NO3- (ii)Which of the following statements about these equations is not truea.step (i) is carried out by 
Nitrosomonas or Nitrococcusb.step (ii) is carried out by 
Nitrobacterc.both steps (i) and (ii) can be called nitrification
d.bacteria carrying out these steps are usually photoautotrophs
6.With regard to the Biological Nitrogen Fixation by 
Rhizobium inassociation with soybean, which one of the following statement/statements does not hold true.a.Nitrogenase may require oxygen for its functioning.
b.Nitrogenase is MO- Fe protein
c.Leg-hemoglobin is a pink coloured pigment.
d.Nitrogenase helps to convert N
2 gas into two molecules of ammonia.7.Match the element with its associated functions/roles and choose the
correct option among given belowA.Boroni.splitting of H
2O to liberate O2 duringphotosynthesisB.Manganeseii.need
ed for synthesis of auxinsC.Molybdenum
iii.component of nitrogenaseD.Zinciv.Pollen 
germinationE.Ironv.component of ferredoxin
Optionsa.A-i, B-ii, C-iii, D-iv, E-v
b.A-iv, B-i, C-iii, D-ii, E-v
c.A-iii, B-ii, C-iv, D-v, E-i
d.A-ii, B-iii, C-v, D-i, E-iv
8.Plants can be grown in (Tick the incorrect option)
a.soil with essential nutrients.
b.water with essential nutrients.
c.either water or soil with essential nutrients.
d.water or soil without essential nutrients.

6565656565MINERAL NUTRITION65656565656565VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Name a plant, which accumulate silicon.
2.Mycorrohiza is a mutualistic association. How do the organisms involved
in this association gain from each other?3.Nitrogen fixation is shown by prokaryotes and not eukaryotes.
Comment?4.Carnivorous plants like 
Nepenthes and Venus fly trap have nutritional
adaptations. Which nutrient do they especially obtain and from where?5.Think of a plant which lacks chlorophyll. From where will it obtain
nutrition? Give an example of such a type of plant.6.Name an insectivorous angiosperm.
7.A farmer adds 
Azotobacter culture to soil before sowing maize. Whichmineral element is being replenished?8.What type of conditions are created by leghaemoglobin in the root nodule
of a legume?9.What is common to 
Nepenthes, utricularia and Drosera with regard tomode of nutrition?10.Plants with zinc deficiency show reduced biosynthesis of _______________.
11.Yellowish edges appear in leaves deficient in __________________ .
12.Name the macronutrient which is a component of all organic compounds
but is not obtained from soil.13.Name one non-symbiotic nitrogen fixing prokaryote.

14.Rice fields produce an important green house gas. Name it.
15.Complete the equation for reductive amination
______?______ + NH
4+ + NADPH  glutamate + H2O       + NADP16.Excess of Mn in soil leads to defeciency of Ca, Mg and Fe. Justify.
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.How is sulphur important for plants? Name the aminoacids in which it
is present.?
66BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS2.How are organisms like 
Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus of greatsignificance in nitrogen cycle?3.Carefully observe the following figure
a.Name the technique shown in the figure and the scientist who
demonstrated this technique for the first time.b.Name atleast three plants for which this technique can be employed
for their commercial production.c.What is the significance of aerating tube and feeding funnel in this
setup?4.Name the most crucial enzyme found in root nodules for N
2 fixation?Does it require a special pink coloured pigment for its functioning?Elaborate.5.How are the terms ‚critical concentration™ and ‚deficient™ different from
each other in terms of concentration of an essential element in plants?
Can you find the values of ‚critical concentration™ and ‚deficient™ forminerals Œ Fe & Zn.6.Carnivorous plants exhibit nutritional adaptation. Citing an example
explain this fact.7.A farmer adds/ supplies Na, Ca, Mg and Fe regularly to his field and yet
he observes that the plants show deficiency of Ca, Mg and Fe. Give a valid
reason and suggest a way to help the farmer improve the growth of plants.
6767676767MINERAL NUTRITION67676767676767LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.It is observed that deficiency of a particular element showed its symptoms
initially in older leaves and then in younger leaves.a.Does it indicate that the element is actively mobilized or relatively
immobile?b.Name two elements which are highly mobile and two which are
relatively immobile.c.How is the aspect of mobility of elements important to horticulture
and agriculture?2.We find that 
Rhizobium forms nodules on the roots of leguminous plants.
Also Frankia another microbe forms nitrogen fixing nodules on the rootsof non-leguminous plant Alnus.a.Can we artificially induce the property of nitrogen fixation in a
plantŒ l
eguminous or non-leguminous?b.What kind of relationship is observed between mycorrihiza and
pine trees?c.Is it necessary for a microbe to be in close association with a
plantto 
provide mineral nutrition? Explain with the help of oneexample.3.What are essential elements for plants? Give the criteria of essentiality?
How are minerals classifieds depending upon the amount in which theyare needed by the plants?4.With the help of examples describe the classification of essential elements
based on the function they perform.5.We know that plants require nutrients. If we supply these in excess, will
it be beneficial to the plants? If yes, how/ If no, why?6.Trace the events starting from the coming in contact of 
Rhizobium to aleguminous root till nodule formation. Add a note on importance of leghemoglobin7.Give the biochemical events occurring in the root nodule of a pulse plant.
What is the end product? What is its fate?8.Hydroponics have been shown to be a successful technique for growing
of plants. Yet most of the crops are still grown on land. Why?

