919191919191919191919191DIGESTION AND ABSORPTIONCHAPTER 16DIGESTION AND ABSORPTIONMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Select what is not true of intestinal villi among followings
a.They possess microvilli
b.They increase the surface area
c.They are supplied with capillaries and the lacteal vessels
d.They only participate in digestion of fats
2.Hepato-pancreatic duct opens into the duodenum and carries
a.Bile
b.Pancreatic juice
c.Both bile and pancreatic juice
d.Saliva
3.One of the following is not a common disorder associated with digestive system
a.Tetanus
b.Diarrhoea
c.Jaundice
d.Dysentery
4.A gland not associated with the alimentary canal is
a.Pancreas
b.Adrenal
c.Liver
d.Salivary glands
5.Match the two columns and select the correct among options given
Column IColumn II
A.Biomacromolecules of foodi.Alimentary canal and
associated glandB.Human digestive systemii.Embedded in jawbones.

92BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSC.Stomachiii.
Outer wall of visceral organsD.Thecodontiv.Converted into simple
substancesE.Serosav.J-shaped bag like structure
Options:a.A-ii, B-i, C-v, D-iii, E-iv
b.A-iv, B-i, C-v, D-ii, E-iii
c.A-i, B-ii, C-iii, D-iv, E-v
d.A-i, B-iii, C-ii, D-iv, E-v
6.Match the two columns and select the right one among options given
Column IColumn II
A.Duodenumi.A cartilaginous flap
B.Epiglottisii.Small blind sac
C.Glottis
iii.‚U™ shaped 
structure emerging fromthe stomachD.Caecumiv.
Opening of wind pipeOptionsa.A-i, B-ii, C-iii, D-iv
b.A-iv, B-iii, C-ii, D-i
c.A-iii, B-i, C-iv, D-ii
d.A-ii, B-iv, C-i, D-iii
7.Match the enzyme with their respective substrate and choose the right
one among options givenColumn I     Column II
A.Lipasei.Dipeptides

B.Nucleaseii.Fats

C.Carboxypeptidase
iii.Nucleic acidsD.Dipeptidasesiv.Proteins, peptones and proteoses.
Options:a.A-ii, B-iii, C-i, D-iv
b.A-iii, B-iv, C-ii, D-i
c.A-iii, B-i, C-iv, D-ii
d.A-ii, B-iii, C-iv, D-i
8.Dental formula in human beings is
a.3 2 2 33 2 2 3b.2 1 2 32 1 2 3
939393939393939393939393DIGESTION AND ABSORPTIONc.1 2 3 21 2 3 2d.2 2 3 3
2 2 3 39.Liver is the largest gland and is associated with various functions, choose
one which is not correcta.Metabolism of carbohydrate
b.Digestion of fat
c.Formation of bile
d.Secretion of hormone called gastric
10.Mark the right statement among the following
a.Trypsinogen is an inactive enzyme
b.Trypsinogen is secreted by intestinal mucosa
c.Enterokinase is secreted by pancrease
d.Bile contains trypsin
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.The food mixes thoroughly with the acidic gastric juice of the stomach
by the churning movements of its muscular wall. What do we call thefood then?2.Trypsinogen is an inactive enzyme of pancreatic juice. An enzyme,
enterokinase, activates it. Which tissue/ cells secrete this enzyme?/ How
is it activated?3.In which part of alimentary canal does absorption of water, simple sugars
and alcohol takes place?4.Name the enzymes involved in the breakdown of nucleotides into sugars
and bases?5.Define digestion in one sentence.
6.What do we call the type of teeth attachment to jaw bones in which each
tooth is embedded in a socket of jaws bones?7.Stomach is located in upper left portion of the abdominal cavity and has
three major parts. Name these three parts.8.Does gall bladder make bile?
9.Correct the following statements by deleting one of entries (given in bold).

94BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSa.Goblet cells are located in the intestinal mucosal epithelium and
secrete chymotrypsin / mucus.b.Fats are broken down into di- and monoglycerides with the help
of amylase/ lipases.c.Gastric glands of stomach mucosa have 
oxyntic cell / chief cellswhichsecrete HCl.
d.Saliva contains enzymes that digest 
starch /protein.SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.What is pancreas? Mention the major secretions of pancreas that are
helpful in digestion.2.Name the part of the alimentary canal where major absorption of digested
food takes place. What are the absorbed forms of different kinds of foodmaterials?3.List the organs of human alimentary canal and name the major digestive
glands with their location.4.What is the role of gall bladder? What may happen if it stops functioning
or is removed?5.Correct the statement given below by the right option shown in the
bracket against thema.Absorption of amino acids and glycerol takes place in the. (small
intestine/ large intestine)b.The faeces in the rectum initiate a reflex causing an urge for its
removal. (neural /hormonal)c.Skin and eyes turn yellow in 
 infection. (liver /stomach)d.Rennin is a proteolytic enzyme found in gastric juice in (infants /
adults).e.Pancreatic juice and bile are released through. (intestine-
pancreatic/ hepato- pancreatic duct)f.Dipeptides, disaccharides and glycerides are broken down into
simple substances in region of small intestine. (jejunum/
duodenum)
6.What are three major types of cells found in the gastric glands? Name
their secretions.7.How is the intestinal mucosa protected from the acidic food entering
from stomach?8.How are the activities of gastro-intestinal tract regulated?

959595959595959595959595DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION9.Distinguish between constipation and indigestion. Mention their major
causes.10.Describe the enzymatic action on fats in the duodenum.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.A person had roti and dal for his lunch. Trace the changes in those
during its passage through the alimentary canal.2.What are the various enzymatic types of glandular secretions in our gut
helping digestion of food? What is the nature of end products obtainedafter complete digestion of food?3.Discuss mechanisms of absorption.
4.Discuss the role of hepato Œ pancreatic complex in digestion of
carbohydrate, protein and fat components of food.5.Explain the process of digestion in the buccal cavity with a note on the
arrangement of teeth.
