38BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSCELL : THE UNIT OF LIFEMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.A common characteristic feature of plant sieve tube cells and most of
mammalian erythrocytes isa.Absence of mitochondria
b.Presence of cell wall
c.Presence of   haemoglobin
d.Absence of nucleus
2.Select one which is not true for ribosome
a.Made of two sub units
b.Form polysome
c.May attach to m RNA
d.Have no role in protien synthesis
3.Which one of these is not a eukaryote?
a.Euglenab.Anabenac.Spirogyrad.Agaricus4.Which of the following dyes is best suited for staining chromosomes?
a.Basic  Fuchsin
b.Safranin
c.Methylene blue
d.Carmine
5.Different cells have different sizes. Arrange the following cells in an
ascending order of their size. Choose the correct option among thefollowingsi.Mycoplasma
ii.Ostrich eggs
CHAPTER 8
39UNIT III: CELL: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS3939393939UNIT III: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS3939393939CELL : THE UNIT OF LIFE39393939393939iii.Human RBCiv.Bacteria
Options:a.i, iv, iii & ii
b.i, ii, iii & iv
c.ii, i, iii & iv
d.iii, ii, i & iv
6.Which of the following features is common to prokaryotes and many
eukaryotes?a.Chromosomes present
b.Cell wall present
c.Nuclear membrane present
d.Sub cellular organelles present
7.Who proposed the fluid mosaic model of plasma membrane?
a.Camillo Golgi
b.Schleiden and Schwann
c.Singer and Nicolson
d.Robert Brown
8.Which of the following statements is true for a secretory cell?
a.Golgi apparatus is absent
b.Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER) is easily observed in the
cellc.Only Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum (SER) is present
d.Secretory granules are formed in nucleus.
9.What is a tonoplast?
a.Outer membrane of mitochondria
b.Inner membrane of chloroplast
c.Membrane boundry of the vacuole of plant cells
d.Cell membrane of a plant cell
10.Which of the following is not true of a eukaryotic cell?
a.It has 80S type of ribosome present in the mitochondria
b.It has 80S type of ribosome present in the cytoplasm
c.Mitochondria contain circular DNA
d.Membrane bound organelles are present

40BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS11.Which of the following statements is not true for plasma membrane?
a.It is present in both plant and animal cell
b.Lipid is present as a bilayer in it
c.Proteins are present integrated as well as loosely associated with
the lipid bilayerd.Carbohydrate is never found in it
12.Plastid differs from mitochondria on the basis of one of the following
features. Mark the right answer.
a.Presence of two layers of membrane
b.Presence of ribosome
c.Presence of chlorophyll
d.Presence of DNA
13.Which of the following is not a function of cytoskeleton in a cell?
a.Intracellular transport
b.Maintenance of cell shape and structure
c.Support of the organelle
d.Cell motility
14.The stain used to visualise motochondria is
a.Fast green
b.Safranin
c.Aceto carmne
d.Janus green
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.What is the significance of vacuole in a plant cell?
2.What does ‚S™ refer in a 70S & an 80S ribosome?
3.Mention a single membrane bound organelle which is rich in hydrolytic
enzymes.4.What are gas vacuoles? State their functions?
5.What is the function of a polysome?
6.What is the feature of a metacentric chromosome?
7.What is refered to as satellite chromosome?

41UNIT III: CELL: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS4141414141UNIT III: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS4141414141CELL : THE UNIT OF LIFE41414141414141SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Discuss briefly the role of nucleolus in the cells actively involved in protein
synthesis.2.Explain the association of carbohydrate to the plasma membrane and
its significance.3.Comment on the cartwheel structure of centriole.
4.Briefly describe the cell theory.
5.Differentiate between Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER) and Smooth
Endoplasmic Reticulum (SER).6.Give the biochemical composition of plasma membrane. How are lipid
molecules arranged in the membrane?7.What are plasmids? Describe their role in bacteria?

8.What are histones? What are their functions?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.What structural and functional attributes must a cell have to be called a
living cell?2.Briefly give the contributions of the following scientists in formulating
the cell theorya.Robert Virchow
b.Schielden and Schwann
3.Is extra genomic DNA present in prokaryotes and eukaryotes? If yes,
indicate their location in both the types of organisms.4.Structure and function are correlatable in living organisms. Can you
justify this by taking plasma membrane as an example?5.Eukaryotic cells  have organelles which may
a.not be bound by a membrane
b.bound by a single membrane
c.bound by a double membrane
Group the various sub-cellular organelles into these three categories.6.The genomic content of the nucleus is constant for a given species where
as the extra chromosomal DNA is found to be variable among themembers of a population. Explain.
42BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS7.Justify the statement, ﬁMitochondria are power houses of the cellﬂ
8.Is there a species specific or region specific type of plastids? How does
one distinguish one from the other?9.Write the functions of the following
a.Centromere
b.Cell wall
c.Smooth ER
d.Golgi Apparatus
e.Centrioles
10.Are the different types of plastids interchangable? If yes, give examples
where they are getting converted from one type to another.

