Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics50R/2R/2ABCDAirHollowsphereSandMCQ I7.1For which of the following does the centre of mass lie outside thebody ?(a)A pencil
(b)A shotput
(c)A dice

(d)A bangle
7.2Which of the following points is the likely position of the centre ofmass of the system shown in Fig. 7.1?(a)A
(b)B
(c)C
(d)D
7.3A particle of mass m is moving in yz-plane with a uniform velocity vwith its trajectory running parallel to +ve y-axis and intersectingChapter SevenSYSTEM OFPARTICLES ANDROTATIONAL MOTIONFig. 7.1
System of Particles andRotational Motion51z-axis at z = a (Fig. 7.2). The change in its angular momentum aboutthe origin as it bounces elastically from a wall at y = constant is:(a)mva êx(b)2
mva êx(c)ymv êx(d)2
ymv êx7.4When a disc rotates with uniform angular velocity, which of thefollowing is not true?(a)The sense of rotation
 remains same.
(b)The orientation of the axis of rotation remains same.
(c)The speed of rotation is non-zer
o and remains same.(d)The angular acceleration is non-zero and remains same.
7.5A uniform square plate has a small piece Q of an irregularshape removed and glued to the centre of the plate leavinga hole behind (Fig. 7.3). The moment of inertia about thez-axis is then(a)increased
(b)decreased
(c)the same
(d)changed in unpr
edicted manner.
7.6In problem 7.5, the CM of the plate is now in the following quadrant

of x-y plane,(a)I
(b)II

(c)III
(d)IV
7.7The density of a non-uniform rod of length 1m is given by
(x)= a(1+bx2)where a and b are constants and 1ox.The centre of mass of the rod will be at(a)3(2)
4(3)
b
b
(b)4(2)

3(3)
b
b
(c)3(3)

4(2)
b
b
(d)4(3)

3(2)
b
b
Fig. 7.2Fig. 7.3
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics527.8A Merry-go-round, made of a ring-like platform of radius R andmass M, is revolving with angular speed . A person of mass M isstanding on it. At one instant, the person jumps off the round,
radially away from the centre of the round (as seen from the round).The speed of the round afterwards is(a)2
(b) (c) 2(d) 0MCQ II7.9Choose the correct alternatives:(a)For a general rotational motion, angular momentum 
L andangular velocity need not be parallel.(b)For a rotational motion about a fixed axis, angular momentum
L and angular velocity are always parallel.(c)For a general translational motion , momentum 
p and  velocityv are always parallel.(d)For a general translational motion, acceleration  
a and  velocityv are always parallel.7.10Figure 7.4 shows two identical particles 1 and 2, each of mass m,moving in opposite directions with same speed 
v along parallel lines.At a particular instant, r1 and r2 are their respective position vectorsdrawn from point A which is in the plane  of the parallel lines .Choose the correct options:(a)Angular momentum 
l1 of particle 1 about A is 11mvd
l(b)Angular momentum 
l2 of particle 2 about A is 22mvrl(c)Total angular momentum of the system about A is
12()mvlrr
(d)Total angular momentum of the system about A is 
21()mvdd

l          represents a  unit vector coming out of the page.
represents a  unit vector going into the page.
7.11The net external torque on a system of particles about an axis iszero. Which of the following are compatible with it ?(a)The forces may be acting radially from a point on the axis.
(b)The forces may be acting on the axis of rotation.
(c)The forces may be acting parallel to the axis of rotation.
(d)The torque caused by some forces may be equal and opposite
to that caused by other forces.Fig. 7.4r1Av12d1d2r2v
System of Particles andRotational Motion537.12Figure 7.5 shows a lamina in x-y plane. Two axes z andzpass perpendicular to its plane. A force F acts in theplane of lamina at point P as shown. Which of the followingare true? (The point P is closer to z-axis than the z-axis.)(a)Torque 
 caused by 
F about  z 
axis is along ‹-k.(b)Torque 
 caused by F about z axis is along ‹-k.(c)Torque 
caused by F about z axis is greater in magnitudethan that about z axis.(d)Total torque is given be 
=




+




.7.13With reference to Fig. 7.6 of a cube of edge a andmass m, state whether the following are true or false.(O is the centre of the cube.)(a)The moment of inertia of cube about 
z-axis isIz = Ix + Iy(b)The moment of inertia of cube about 
z is2'2zzmaII(c)The moment of inertia of cube about z
 is22zmaI(d)Ix = IyVSA7.14The centre of gravity of a body on the earth coincides with its centreof mass for a ‚small™ object whereas for an ‚extended™ object it may
not. What is the qualitative meaning of ‚small™ and ‚extended™ inthis regard?For which of the following the two coincides? A building, a pond, alake, a mountain?7.15Why does a solid sphere have smaller moment of inertia than a
hollow cylinder of same mass and radius, about an axis passing
through their axes of symmetry?7.16The variation of angular position , of a point on a rotatingrigid body, with time t is shown in Fig. 7.7. Is the body rotatingclock-wise or anti-clockwise?Fig. 7.6FzzPFig. 7.5Fig. 7.7
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics54Fig. 7.107.17A uniform cube of mass 
m and side a is placed on a frictionlesshorizontal surface. A vertical force F is applied to the edge as shownin Fig. 7.8. Match the following (most appropriate choice):(a)mg/4 </2Fmg
(i)Cube will move up.
(b)F > mg/2(ii)
Cube will not exhibit motion.(c)F > mg(iii)Cube will begin to rotate andslip at A.(d)F = mg/4(iv)Normal rea
ction effectively at
a/3 from A, no motion.7.18A uniform sphere of mass m and radius R is placed on a roughhorizontal surface (Fig. 7.9). The sphere is struck horizontally at aheight h from the floor. Match the following:
(a)h = R/2(i)Sphere rolls without slipping with a
constant velocity and no loss of energy.
(b)h = R(ii)Sphere 
spins clockwise, loses energy by
friction.(c)h = 3R/2(iii)
Sphere 
spins anti-clockwise, loses energy
by friction.(d)h = 7R/5(iv)Sphere 
has only a translational motion,looses energy by friction.SA7.19The vector sum of a system of non-collinear forces acting on a rigidbody is given to be non-zero. If the vector sum of all the torques due

to the system of forces about a certain point is found to be zero,
does this mean that it is necessarily zero about any arbitrary point?
7.20A wheel in uniform motion about an axis passing through its centreand perpendicular to its plane is considered to be in mechanical(translational plus rotational) equilibrium because no net externalforce or torque is required to sustain its motion. However, the

particles that constitute the wheel do experience a centripetal
acceleration directed towards the centre. How do you reconcile thisfact with the wheel being in equilibrium?How would you set a half-wheel into uniform motion about an
axis passing through the centre of mass of the wheel and
perpendicular to its plane? Will you require external forces to
sustain the motion?7.21A door is hinged at one end and is free to rotate about a vertical
axis (Fig. 7.10). Does its weight cause any torque about this axis?
Give reason for your answer.
Fig. 7.8Fig. 7.9
System of Particles andRotational Motion557.22(n-1) equal point masses each of mass m are placed at the verticesof a regular n-polygon. The vacant vertex has a position vector awith respect to the centre of  the polygon. Find the position vector ofcentre of mass.LA7.23Find the centre of mass of a uniform (a) half-disc, (b) quarter-disc.
7.24Two discs of moments of inertia 12IandI
 about their respectiveaxes (normal to the disc and passing through the centre), androtating with angular speed 12and are brought into contactface to face with their axes of rotation coincident.(a)Does the law of conservation of angular momentum apply to
the situation? why?(b)Find the angular speed of the two-disc system.
(c)Calculate the loss in kinetic energy of the system in the process.

(d)Account for this loss.
7.25A disc of radius R is rotating with an angular speed oabout ahorizontal axis. It is placed on a horizontal table. The coefficient ofkinetic friction is k.(a)What was the velocity of its centre of mass before being brought
in contact with the table?(b)What happens to the linear velocity of a point on its rim when
placed in contact with the table?(c)What happens to the linear speed of the centre of mass when
disc is placed in contact with the table?    (d)Which force is responsible for the effects in (b) and (c).
(e)What condition should be satisfied for rolling to begin?
(f)Calculate the time taken for the rolling to begin.
7.26Two cylindrical hollow drums of radii R and 2R, and of a commonheight h, are rotating with angular velocities (anti-clockwise) and(clockwise), respectively. Their axes, fixed are parallel and in ahorizontal plane separated by (3)
R. They are now brought incontact (0)
.(a)Show the frictional forces just after contact.
(b)Identify forces and torques external to the system just after
contact.(c)What would be the ratio of final angular velocities when friction
ceases?
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics567.27A uniform square plate S (side c) and a uniform rectangular plateR (sides b, a) have identical areas and masses (Fig. 7.11).Fig. 7.12Fig. 7.11Show that()/1;()/1;()/1.
xRxSyRySzRzS
iIIiiIIiiiII

7.28A uniform disc of radius R, is resting on a table on its rim.Thecoefficient of friction between disc and table is  (Fig 7.12). Now thedisc is pulled with a force F as shown in the figure. What is themaximum value of F for which the disc rolls without slipping ?
