MCQ I8.1The earth is an approximate sphere. If the interior contained matterwhich is not of the same density everywhere, then on the surfaceof the earth, the acceleration due to gravity(a)will be directed towards the centre but not the same everywhere.(b)will have the same value everywhere but not directed towardsthe centre.(c)will be same everywhere in magnitude directed towards thecentre.(d)cannot be zero at any point.8.2As observed from earth, the sun appears to move in anapproximate circular orbit. For the motion of another planet likemercury as observed from earth, this would(a)be similarly true.(b)not be true because the force between earth and mercury isnot inverse square law.Chapter EightGRAVITATION
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics58(c)not be true because the major gravitational force on mercuryis due to sun.(d)not be true because mercury is influenced by forces other than
gravitational forces.8.3Different points in earth are at slightly different distances fromthe sun and hence experience different forces due to gravitation.For a rigid body, we know that if various forces act at variouspoints in it, the resultant motion is as if a net force acts onthe c.m. (centre of mass) causing translation and a net torqueat the c.m. causing rotation around an axis through the c.m.For the earth-sun system (approximating the earth as auniform density sphere)(a)the torque is zero.(b)the torque causes the earth to spin.(c)the rigid body result is not applicable since the earth is noteven approximately a rigid body.(d)the torque causes the earth to move around the sun.8.4Satellites orbiting the earth have finite life and sometimes debrisof satellites fall to the earth. This is because,(a)the solar cells and batteries in satellites run out.(b)the laws of gravitation predict a trajectory spiralling inwards.(c)of viscous forces causing the speed of satellite and hence heightto gradually decrease.(d)of collisions with other satellites.8.5Both earth and moon are subject to the gravitational force of thesun. As observed from the sun, the orbit of the moon(a)will be elliptical.(b)will not be strictly elliptical because the total gravitational forceon it is not central.(c)is not elliptical but will necessarily be a closed curve.(d)deviates considerably from being elliptical due to influence ofplanets other than earth.8.6In our solar system, the inter-planetary region has chunks ofmatter (much smaller in size compared to planets) called asteroids.They(a)will not move around the sun since they have very small massescompared to sun.(b)will move in an irregular way because of their small massesand will drift away into outer space.(c)will move around the sun in closed orbits but not obey
Kepler™s laws.(d)will move in orbits like planets and obey Kepler™s laws.
Gravitation598.7Choose the wrong option.(a)Inertial mass is a measure of difficulty of accelerating a bodyby an external force whereas the gravitational mass is relevantin determining the gravitational force on it by an external mass.(b)That the gravitational mass and inertial mass are equal is an
experimental result.(c)That the acceleration due to gravity on earth is the same for allbodies is due to the equality of gravitational mass and inertial mass.(d)Gravitational mass of a particle  like proton can depend on the
presence of neighouring heavy objects but the inertial masscannot.8.8Particles of masses 2M, m and M are respectively at points A, Band C with AB = ½ (BC). m is much-much smaller than M and attime t = 0, they are all at rest (Fig. 8.1).At subsequent times before any collision takes place:Fig. 8.12MABCMm(a)m will remain at rest.(b)m will move towards M.(c)m will move towards 2M.(d)m will have oscillatory motion.MCQ II8.9Which of the following options are correct?(a)Acceleration due to gravity decreases with increasing altitude.(b)Acceleration due to gravity increases with increasing depth(assume the earth to be a sphere of uniform density).(c)Acceleration due to gravity increases with increasing latitude.(d)Acceleration due to gravity is independent of the mass of the
earth.8.10If the law of gravitation, instead of being inverse-square law,becomes an inverse-cube law-(a)planets will not have elliptic orbits.(b)circular orbits of planets is not possible.(c)projectile motion of a stone thrown by hand on the surface ofthe earth will be approximately parabolic.(d)there will be no gravitational force inside a spherical shell of
uniform density.
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics608.11If the mass of sun were ten times smaller and gravitational constantG were ten times  larger in magnitudes-(a)walking on ground would became more difficult.(b)the acceleration  due to gravity on earth will not change.(c)raindrops will fall much faster.(d)airplanes will have to travel much faster.8.12If the sun and the planets carried huge amounts of opposite charges,(a)all three of Kepler™s laws would still be valid.(b)only the third law will be valid.(c)the second law will not change.(d)the first law will still be valid.8.13There have been suggestions that the value of the gravitational
constant G becomes smaller when considered over very largetime period (in billions of years) in the future. If that happens,for our earth,(a)nothing will change.(b)we will become hotter after billions of years.(c)we will be going around but not strictly in closed orbits.(d)after sufficiently long time we will leave the solar system.8.14Supposing Newton™s law of gravitation for gravitation forcesF1 and F2 between two masses m1 and m2 at positions r1 and r2 read12
20Œ=Œ
n12
20312
mm
GM
Mr


12
rFF
where M0 is a constant of dimensionof mass, r12 = r1 Œ r2 and n is a number. In such a case,(a)the acceleration due to gravity on earth will be different fordifferent objects.(b)none of the three laws of Kepler will be valid.(c)only the third law will become invalid.(d)for n negative, an object lighter than water will sink in water.8.15Which of the following are true?(a)A polar satellite goes around the earth™s pole in north-south direction.(b)A geostationary satellite goes around the earth in east-west
direction.(c)A geostationary satellite goes around the earth in west-eastdirection.(d)A polar satellite goes around the earth in east-west direction.
Gravitation618.16The centre of mass of an extended body on the surface of the earthand its centre of gravity(a)are always at the same point for any size of the body.(b)are always at the same point only for spherical bodies.(c)can never be at the same point.(d)is close to each other for objects, say of sizes less than 100 m.(e)both can change if the object is taken deep inside the earth.VSA8.17Molecules in air in the atmosphere are attracted by gravitationalforce of the earth. Explain why all of them do not fall into the earthjust like an apple falling from a tree.8.18Give one example each of central force and non-central force.8.19Draw areal velocity versus time graph for mars.8.20What is the direction of areal velocity of the earth around the sun?8.21How is the gravitational force between two point masses affectedwhen they are dipped in water keeping the separation betweenthem the same?8.22Is it possibe for a body to have inertia but no weight?8.23We can shield a charge from electric fields by putting it inside ahollow conductor. Can we shield a body from the gravitationalinfluence of nearby matter by putting it inside a hollow sphere orby some other means?8.24An astronaut inside a small spaceship orbiting around the earthcannot detect gravity. If the space station orbiting around the earthhas a large size, can he hope to detect gravity?8.25The gravitational force between a hollow spherical shell (of radiusR and uniform density) and a point mass is F. Show the nature ofF vs r graph where r is the distance of the point from the centre ofthe hollow spherical shell of uniform density.8.26Out of aphelion and perihelion, where is the speed of the earthmore and why ?8.27What is the angle between the equatorial plane and the orbitalplane of(a)Polar satellite?(b)Geostationary satellite?
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics62SA8.28Mean solar day is the time interval between two successive noonwhen sun passes through zenith point (meridian).Sidereal day is the time interval between two successive transit of
a distant star through the zenith point (meridian).By drawing appropriate diagram showing earth™s spin and orbitalmotion, show that mean solar day is four minutes longer than the
sidereal day. In other words, distant stars would rise 4 minutesearly every  successive day.(Hint:  you may assume circular orbit for the earth).8.29Two identical heavy spheres are separated by a distance 10 timestheir radius. Will an object placed at the mid point of the line joiningtheir centres be in stable equilibrium or unstable equilibrium?
Give reason for your answer.8.30Show the nature of the following graph for a satellite orbiting theearth.(a)KE vs orbital radius R(b)PE vs orbital radius R(c)TE vs orbital radius R.8.31Shown are several curves (Fig. 8.2). Explain with reason, whichones amongst them can be possible trajectories traced by aprojectile (neglect air friction).(a)(b)(c)EarthEarthEarth(d)(f)Fig. 8.2EarthEarth(e)Earth
Gravitation638.32An object of mass m is raised from the surface of the earth to aheight equal to the radius of the earth, that is, taken from a distanceR to 2R from the centre of the earth. What is the gain in its potentialenergy?8.33A mass m is placed at P a distance h along the normal through thecentre O of a thin circular ring of mass M and radius r (Fig. 8.3).Fig. 8.3rhPmoMIf the mass is removed further away such that OP becomes 2h, bywhat factor the force of gravitation will decrease, ifh = r ?LA8.34A star like the sun has several bodies moving around it at differentdistances. Consider that all of them are moving in circular orbits.Let r be the distance of the body from the centre of the star and letits linear velocity be v, angular velocity w, kinetic energy K,gravitational potential energy U, total energy E and angularmomentum l. As the radius r of the orbit increases, determinewhich of the above quantities increase and which ones decrease.8.35Six point masses of mass m each are at the vertices of a regularhexagon of side l. Calculate the force on any of the masses.8.36A satellite is to be placed in equatorial geostationary  orbit aroundearth for communication.(a)Calculate height of such a satellite.(b)Find out the minimum number of satellites that are needed tocover entire earth so that at least one satellites is visible from
any point on the equator.[M = 6 × 1024 kg, R = 6400 km, T = 24h, G = 6.67 × 10Œ11 SI units]
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics648.37Earth™s orbit is an ellipse with eccentricity 0.0167. Thus,earth™s distance from the sun and speed as it moves aroundthe sun varies from day to day. This means that the lengthof the solar day is not constant through the year. Assumethat earth™s spin axis is normal to its orbital plane and findout the length of the shortest and the longest day. A dayshould be taken from noon to noon. Does this explainvariation of length of the day during the year?8.38A satellite is in an elliptic orbit around the earth with
aphelion of 6R and perihelion of 2 R where R= 6400 km isthe radius of the earth. Find eccentricity of the orbit. Findthe velocity of the satellite at apogee and perigee. Whatshould be done if this satellite has to be transferred  to acircular orbit of radius 6R ?[G = 6.67 × 10Œ11 SI units and M = 6 × 1024 kg]
