MCQ I3.1Among the four graphs (Fig. 3.1), there is only one graph for whichaverage velocity over the time intervel (0, T ) can vanish for asuitably chosen T. Which one is it?Chapter ThreeMOTION IN ASTRAIGHT LINEFig. 3.1(a)(b)
(c)(d)

Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics143.2A lift is coming from 8th floor and is just about to reach4th floor. Taking ground floor as origin and positive
direction upwards for all quantities, which one of thefollowing is correct?(a)x < 0, v < 0, a > 0(b)x > 0, v < 0, a < 0(c)x > 0, v < 0, a > 0(d)x > 0, v > 0, a < 03.3In one dimensional motion, instantaneous speed v satisfies0    v  <  v
0.(a)The displacement in time 
T must always take non-negativevalues.(b)The displacement 
x in time T satisfies Œ vo T < x < vo T.(c)The acceleration is always a non-negative number.
(d)The motion has no turning points.
3.4A vehicle travels half the distance L with speed V1 and the otherhalf with speed V2, then its average speed is(a)122VV(b)12122VVVV(c) 
12122VVVV(d)1212()LVV
VV3.5The displacement of a particle is given by x = (t Œ 2)
2  where x is inmetres and t in seconds. The distance covered by the particle infirst 4 seconds is(a)4 m
(b)8 m
(c)12 m
(d)16 m
3.6At a metro station, a girl walks up a stationary escalator in time t1.If she remains stationary on the escalator, then the escalator take

Motion in a Straight Line15her up in time t2. The time taken by her to walk up on the movingescalator will be(a)(
t1 + t2)/2(b)t1t2/(t2Œt1)(c)t1t2/(t2+t1)(d)t1Œt2MCQ II3.7The variation of quantity A with quantity B, plotted inFig. 3.2 describes the motion of a particle in a straightline.(a)Quantity B may represent time.
(b)Quantity A is velocity if motion is uniform.
(c)Quantity A is displacement if motion is uniform.

(d)Quantity A is velocity if motion is uniformly
accelerated.3.8A graph of x versus t is shown in Fig. 3.3. Choosecorrect alternatives from below.(a)The particle was released from rest at 
t = 0.(b)At B, the acceleration 
a > 0.(c)At C, the velocity and the acceleration vanish.
(d)Average velocity for the motion between A and D is
positive.(e)The speed at D exceeds that at E.
3.9
For the one-dimensional motion, described by x = tŒsint(a)x (t) > 0 for all t  > 0.(b)v (t) > 0 for all t > 0.(c)a (t) > 0 for all t > 0.(d)v (t) lies between 0 and 2.3.10A spring with one end attached to a mass and the other to a rigidsupport is stretched and released.(a)Magnitude of acceleration, when just released is maximum.
(b)Magnitude of acceleration, when at equilibrium position, is
maximum.(c)Speed is maximum when mass is at equilibrium position.
(d)Magnitude of displacement is always maximum whenever speed
is minimum.ABFig. 3.2xABCtEDFig. 3.3
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics163.11A ball is bouncing elastically with a speed 1 m/s between walls ofa railway compartment of size 10 m in a direction perpendicular
to walls. The train is moving at a constant velocity of 10 m/s parallelto the direction of motion of the ball. As seen from the ground,(a)the direction of motion of the ball changes every 10 seconds.
(b)speed of ball changes every 10 seconds.
(c)average speed of ball over any 20 second interval is fixed.

(d)the acceleration of  ball is the same as from the train.
VSA3.12Refer to the graphs in Fig 3.1. Match the following.GraphCharacteristic
(a)(i)has 
v > 0 and a < 0 throughout.(b)(ii)
has x > 0 throughout and has a point withv = 0 and a point with a = 0.
(c)(iii)has a 
point with zero displacement for t > 0.(d)(iv)
has v < 0 and a > 0.3.13A uniformly moving cricket ball is turned back by hitting it with abat for a very short time interval. Show the variation of its
acceleration with time. (Take acceleration in the backward direction
as positive).3.14Give examples of a one-dimensional motion where(a)the particle moving along positive 
x-direction comes to restperiodically and moves forward.(b)the particle moving along positive 
x-direction comes to restperiodically and moves backward.3.15Give example of a motion where 
x > 0, 
v < 0, a > 0 at a particularinstant.
3.16An object falling through a fluid is observed to have accelerationgiven by a = g Œ bv where g = gravitational acceleration and b isconstant. After a long time of release, it is observed to fall with
constant speed. What must be the value of constant speed?
Motion in a Straight Line17SA3.17A ball is dropped and its displacement vs time graph isas shown Fig. 3.4 (displacement x  is from ground andall quantities are +ve upwards).(a)Plot qualitatively velocity vs time graph.
(b)Plot qualitatively acceleration vs time graph.
3.18A particle 
executes the motion described by 
();
1toxtx
e0t,x0 > 0.(a)Where does the particle start and with what velocity?
(b)Find maximum and minimum values of 
x (t), v (t), a (t). 
Show thatx (t) 
and a (t) 
increase with time and v (t) 
decreases with time.3.19A bird is tossing (flying to and fro) between two cars movingtowards each other on a straight road. One car has a speed of 18
m/h while the other has the speed of 27km/h. The bird starts
moving from first car towards the other and is moving with the
speed of 36km/h and when the two cars were separted by 36 km.
What is the total distance covered by the bird? What is the total
displacement of the bird?3.20A man runs across the roof-top of a tall building and jumps
horizontally with the hope of landing on the roof of the next
building which is of a lower height than the first. If his speed is 9
m/s, the (horizontal) distance between the two buildings is 10 m
and the height difference is 9 m, will he be able to land on the next
building? (take
 g = 10 m/s2)3.21A ball is dropped from a building of height 45 m.Simultaneously another ball is thrown up with a speed
40 m/s. Calculate the relative speed of the balls as afunction of time.3.22The velocity-displacement graph of a particle is shown

in Fig. 3.5.(a)Write the relation between 
v and x.(b)Obtain the relation between acceleration and
displacement and plot it.xoxvovOFig. 3.5Fig. 3.4
Exemplar ProblemsŒPhysics18LA3.23It is a common observation that rain clouds can be at about akilometre altitude above the ground.(a)If a rain drop falls from such a height freely under gravity, what
will be its speed? Also calculate in km/h. (g = 10m/s2)(b)A typical rain drop is about 4mm diameter. Momentum is mass
x speed in magnitude. Estimate its momentum when it hits
ground.(c)Estimate the time required to flatten the drop.
(d)Rate of change of momentum is force. Estimate how much force
such a drop would exert on you.(e)Estimate the order of magnitude force on umbrella. Typical
lateral separation between two rain drops is 5 cm.(Assume that umbrella is circular and has a diameter of 1mand cloth is not pierced through !!)3.24A motor car moving at a speed of 72km/h can not come to a stopin less than 3.0 s while for a truck this time interval is 5.0 s. On ahigway the car is behind the truck both moving at 72km/h. Thetruck gives a signal that it is going to stop at emergency. At what
distance the car should be from the truck so that it does not bump
onto (collide with) the truck. Human response time is 0.5s.(Comment : This is to illustrate why vehicles carry the message on therear side. ﬁKeep safe Distanceﬂ)3.25A monkey climbs up a slippery pole for 3 seconds andsubsequently slips for 3 seconds. Its velocity at time t is givenby v(t) = 2t (3-t); 0< t < 3 and v (t)=Œ(tŒ3)(6Œt) for 3 < t < 6 s inm/s. It repeats this cycle till it reaches the height of 20 m.(a)At what time is its velocity maximum?
(b)At what time is its average velocity maximum?
(c)At what time is its acceleration maximum in magnitude?
(d)How many cycles (counting fractions) are required to reach the
top?3.26A man is standing on top of a building 100 m high. He throws twoballs vertically, one at t = 0 and other after a time interval (lessthan 2 seconds). The later ball is thrown at a velocity of half the
first. The vertical gap between first and second ball is +15 m att  = 2 s. The gap is found to remain constant. Calculate the velocitywith which the balls were thrown and the exact time intervalbetween their throw.
