2727272727ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS27272727272727CHAPTER 6ANATOMY
 OF FLOWERING PLANTSMULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.A transverse section of stem is stained first with safranin and then with
fast green following the usual schedule of double staining for thepreparation of a permanent slide. What would be the colour of the stainedxylem and phloem?a.Red and green
b.Green and red
c.Orange and yellow
d.Purple and orange
2.Match the followings and choose the correct option from below
A.Meristemi.Photosynthesis, storage
B.Parenchymaii.mechanical support
C.Collenchyma
iii.Actively dividing cellsD.Sclerenchymaiv.stomata
E.Epidermal ti
ssuev.scl
ereidsOptions:a.A-i,B-iii,C-v,D-ii,E-iv
b.A-iii,B-i,
C-ii,D-v,E-iv
c.A-ii,B-iv,C-v,D-i,E-iii
d.A-v,B-iv,C-iii,D-ii,E-i
3.Match the following and choose the correct option from below
A.Cuticlei.guard cells

B.Bulli form cellsii.single layer
C.Stomata
iii.w
axy layerD.Epidermisiv.empty colourless cell
Options:a.A-iii,B-iv,C-i,D-ii
b.A-i,B-ii,C-iii,D-iv
c.A-iii,
B-ii,C-iv,D-i
d.A-iii,
B-ii,C-i,D-iv

28BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS4.Identify the tissue system from among the following
a.Parenchyma
b.Xylem
c.Epidermis
d.Phloem
5.Cells of this tissue are living and show angular wall thickning. They also
provide mechanical support. The tissue isa.Xylem
b.Sclerenchyma
c.Collenchyma
d.Epidermis
6.Epiblema of roots is equivalent to
a.Pericycle
b.Endodermis
c.Epidermis
d.Stele
7.A conjoint and open vascular bundle will be observed in the transverse
section ofa.Monocot root
b.Monocot stem
c.Dicot root
d.Dicot stem
8.Interfascicular cambium and cork cambium are formed due to
a.Cell division
b.Cell differentiation
c.Cell dedifferentiation
d.Redifferentiation
9.Phellogen and Phellem respectively denote
a.Cork and cork cambium
b.Cork cambium and cork
c.Secondary cortex and cork
d.Cork and secondary cortex

2929292929ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS2929292929292910.In which of the following pairs of parts of a flowering plant is epidermis
absent?a.Root tip and shoot tip
b.Shoot bud and floral bud
c.Ovule and seed
d.Petiole and pedicel
11.How many shoot apical meritsems are likely to be present in a twig of a
plant possessing, 4 branches and 26 leavesa.26
b.1
c.5
d.30
e.4
12.A piece of wood having no vessels (trachea) must be belong to
a.Teak
b.Mango
c.Pine
d.Palm
13.A plant tissue, when stained, showed the presence of hemicellulose and
pectin in cell wall of its cells. The tissue representsa.Collenchyma
b.Sclerenchyma
c.Xylem
d.Meristem
14.Fibres are likely to be absent in
a.Secondary phloem
b.Secondary Xylem
c.Primary phloem
d.Leaves
15.When we peel the skin of a potato tuber, we remove
a.Periderm
b.Epidermis
c.Cuticle
d.Sapwood

30BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS16.A vesselless piece of stem possessing prominent sieve tubes would
belong toa.Pinusb.Eucalyptusc.Grass
d.Trochodendron
17.Which one of the following cell types always divides by anticlinal cell
division?a.fusiform initial cells
b,root cap
c.protoderm
d.phellogen
18.What is the fate of primary xylem in a dicot root showing extensive
secondary growth?a.It is retained in the centre of the axis
b.It gets crushed
c.May or may not get crushed
d.It gets surrounded by primary phloem
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Product of photosynthesis is transported from the leaves to various parts
of the plants and stored in some cell before being utilised. What are thecells/ tissues that store them?2.Protoxylem is the first formed xylem. If the protoxylem lies next to phloem
what kind of arrangement of xylem would you call it?3.What is the function of phloem parenchyma?
4.What is present on the surface of the leaves which helps the plant prevent
loss of water but is absent in roots?5.What is the epidermal cell modification in plants which prevents water
loss?6.What part of the plant would show the following:
a.Radial vascular bundle
b.Polyarch xylem
c.Well developed pith
7.What are the cells that make the leaves curl in plants during water stress?

3131313131ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS313131313131318.What constitutes the cambial ring?
9.Give one basic functional difference between phellogen and phelloderm.
10.Arrange the following in the sequence you would find them in a plant
starting from the periphery Œ phellem, phellogen, phelloderm.11.If one debarks a tree, what parts of the plant is being removed?

12.The cross-section of a plant material showed the following features when
viewed under the microscope.a.The vascular bundles were radially arranged.
b.Four xylem strands with exarch condition of protoxylem.
To which  organ should it be assigned?13.What do hard wood and soft wood stand for?
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.While eating peach or pear it is usually seen that some stone like structures
get entangled in the teeth, what are these stone like structures called?2.What is the commercial source of cork? How is it formed in the plant?
3.Below is a list of plant fibres. From which part of the plant these are
obtaineda.Coir
b.Hemp
c.Cotton
d.Jute
4.What are the characteristic differences found in the vascular tissue of
gymnosperms and angiosperms?5.Epidermal cells are often modified to perform specialized functions in
plants. Name some of them and function they perform.6.The lawn grass (
Cyandon dactylon) needs to be mowed frequently toprevent its overgrowth. Which tissue is responsible for its rapid growth?7.Plants require water for their survival. But when watered excessively,
plants die. Discuss.8.A transverse section of the trunk of a tree shows concentric rings which
are known as growth rings. How are these rings formed? What is thesignificance of these rings?9.Trunks of some of the aged tree species appear to be composed of several
fused trunks. Is it a physiological or anatomical abnormality? Explainin detail.
32BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS10.What is the difference between lenticels and stomata?
11.Write the precise function of
a.Sieve tube
b.Interfasicular cambium
c.Collenchyma
d.Aerenchyma
12.The stomatal pore is guarded by two kidney shaped guard cells. Name
the epidermal cells surrounding the guard cells. How does a guard celldiffer from an epidermal cell? Use a diagram to illustrate your answer.
13.Point out the differences in the anatomy of, leaf of peepal  (
Ficus religiosa)and maize (Zea mays). Draw the diagrams and label the differences.14.Palm is a monocotyledonous plant, yet it increases in girth. Why and how?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known as placentation.
What does the term placenta refer to? Draw various types of placentationsin the flower as seen in T.S. and V.S.
2.Deciduos plants shed their leaves during hot summer or in autumn.
This process of shedding of leaves is called abscission. Apart from
physiological changes what anatomical mechanism is involved in theabscission of leaves.3.Is Pinus an evergreen tree? Comment.
4.Assume that a pencil box held in your hand, represents a plant cell. In
how many possible planes can it be cut? Indicate these cuts with thehelp of line drawings.5.Each of the following terms has some anatomical significance. What do
these terms mean? Explain with the help of line diagrams.a.Plasmadesmoses/ Plasmodesmata
b.Middle lamella
c.Secondary wall
6.Distinguish between the following:
a.Exarch  and endarch condition of protoxylem
b.Stele and vascular bundle
c.Protoxylem and metaxylem
d.Interfasicular cambium and intrafasicular cambium
e.Open and closed vascular bundles
f.Stem hair and root hair

