123123123123123123123123123123123123CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATIONCHAPTER 22CHEMICAL COORDINATION
 ANDINTEGRATION
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Select the right match of endocrine gland and their hormones among
the options given belowA.Pineal   
   i.Epinephrine
B.Thyroidii.Melatonin
C.Ovary
iii.E
strogenD.Adrenal medullaiv.Tetraiodothyronine
Options:
a.A-iv, B-ii, C-iii, D-i
b.A-ii, B-iv, C-i, D-iii
c.A-iv, B-ii, C-i, D-iii
d.A-ii, B-iv, C-iii, D-i
2.Listed below are the hormones of anteri
or pituitary origin. Tick the wrong
entry.a.Growth hormone
b.Follicle stimulating hormone
c.Oxytocin
d.Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
3.Mary is about to face an interview. But during the first five minutes
before the interview she experiences sweating, increased rate of heartbeat, respiration etc. Which hormone is responsible for her restlessness?a.Estrogen and progesterone
b.Oxytocin and vasopressin
c.Adrenaline and noradrenaline
d.Insulin and glucagon

124BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS4.The steroid responsible for balance of water and electrolytes in our body is
a.Insulin
b.Melatonin
c.Testosterone
d.Aldosterone
5.Thymosin is responsible for
a.Raising the blood sugar level
b.Raising the blood calcium level
c.Increased production of T lymphocytes
d.Decrease in blood RBC
6.In the mechanism of action of a protein hormone, one of the second
messengers isa.Cyclic AMP
b.Insulin
c.T
3d.Gastrin
7.Leydig cells produce a group of hormones called
a.Androgens
b.Estrogens
c.Aldosterone
d.Gonadotropins
8.Corpus luteum secretes a hormone called
a.Prolactin
b.Progesterone
c.Aldosterone
d.Testosterone
9.Cortisol is secreted from
a.Pancrease
b.Thyroid
c.Adrenal
d.Thymus
10.A hormone responsible for normal sleep-wake cycle is
a.Epinephrine
b.Gastrin
c.Melatonin
d.Insulin

125125125125125125125125125125125125CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION11.Hormones are called chemical signals that stimulate specific target
tissues. Their specificity is due to the presence of signal receiving‚receptors™ only in the respective target tissues. Where are these receptorspresent in case of hormones of protein nature?a.Extra cellular matrix
b.Blood
c.Plasma membrane
d.Nucleus
12.Choose the correct answer among the following options
A.Epinephrinei.
Increase in muscle growthB.Testosteroneii.
Decrease in blood pressureC.Glucagon
iii.D
ecrease in liver glycogencontentD.Atrial natriuretic factoriv.Increase heart beat
Options:a.-ii,B-i,C
-iii,D-i
b.A-iv,B-i,C-iii,D-ii
c.A-i,B-ii,C-iii,D-iv
d.A-i,B-iv,C-ii,D-iii
13.Blood calcium level is a resultant of how much dietary calcium is
absorbed, how much calcium is lost in the urine, how much bonedissolves releasing calcium into the blood and how much calcium fromblood enters tissues. A number of factors play an important role in theseprocesses. Mark the one which has no role.a.Vitamin D
b.Parathyroid hormone
c.Thyrocalcitonin
d.Thymosin
14.All the following tissues in mammals except one consists of a central
‚medullary™ region surrounded by a cortical region. Mark the wrong entrya.Ovary
b.Adrenal
c.Liver
d.Kidney
15.One of the following conditions is not linked to deficiency of thyroid
hormones
126BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSa.Cretinism
b.Goitre
c.Myxedema
d.Exophthalmosis
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.There are many endocrine glands in human body. Name the glands
which is absent in male and the one absent in female.2.Which of the two adrenocortical layers, zona glomerulosa and zona
reticularis lies outside enveloping the other?3.What is erythropoiesis? Which hormone stimulate it?
4.Name the only hormone secreted by pars intermedia of the pituitary
gland.5.Name the endocrine gland that produces calcitonin and mention the
role played by this hormone.6.Name the hormone that helps in cell - mediated immunity.
7.What is the role of second messenger in the mechanism of protein
hormone action?8.State whether true or false:
a.Gastrointestinal tract, kidney and heart also produce hormones.
b.Pars distalis produces six trophic hormones.
c.B-lymphocytes provide cell-mediated immunity.
d.Insulin resistance results in a disease called diabetes mellitus.
9.A patient complains of constant thirst, excessive passing of urine and
low blood pressure. When the doctor checked the patients™ blood glucoseand blood insulin level, the level were normal or slightly low. The doctordiagnosed the condition as diabetes insupidus. But he decided tomeasure one more hormone in patients blood. Which  hormone does thedoctor intend to measure?10.Correct the following statements by replacing the term underlined.
a.Insulin is a 
steroid hormone.b.TSH is secreted from the 
corpus luteumc.Tetraiodothyronine is an 
emergency hormone.
d.The 
pineal gland is located on the anterior part of the kidney.
127127127127127127127127127127127127CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION11.Rearrange the following hormones in Column I so as to match with their
chemical nature in Column II.Column I   Column II
a.Oxytocini.Aminoacid derivative(     )
b.Epinephrineii.Steroid(     )
c.Progesterone
iii.Protein(     )
d.Growth hormoneiv.Peptide(     )
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.What is the role-played by luteinizing hormones in males and females
respectively?2.What is the role of second messenger in hormone action?
3.On an educational trip to Uttaranchal, Ketki and her friends observe
that many local people were having swollen necks. Please help Ketkiand her friends to find out the solutions to the following questions.a.Which probable disease are these people suffering from?
b.How is it caused?
c.What effect does this condition have on pregnancy?
4.George comes on a vacation to India from US. The long journey disturbs
his biological system and he suffers from jet lag. What is the cause of hisdiscomfort?5.Inflammatory responses can be controlled by a certain steroid. Name
the steroid, its source and also its other important functions.6.Old people have weak immune system. What could be the reason?
7.What are the effects of hypothyroidism (observed during pregnancy) on
the development and maturation of a growing baby?8.Mention the difference between hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism.

9.You have learnt that a characteristic feature of endocrine system is the
presence of feed back loops. By this what is meant if hormone A stimulatesgland ‚X™ to secrete hormone B, the production of ‚A™ could be modifiedwhen the level of B changes in our blood. An example is the relationbetween hormones LH and estrogen (E2). An old woman exhibits thefollowing features. High levels of LH in blood but low levels of E2 in theblood. Another woman exhibits high level of LH in blood and also highlevel of E2 in the blood. Where is the defect in both these women? Providesuitable diagram to support this answer.

128BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSLONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.A milkman is very upset one morning as his cow refuses to give any
milk. The milkman™s wife gets the calf from the shed. On fondling by thecalf, the cow gave sufficient milk. Describe the role of endocrine glandand pathway associated with this response?2.A sample of urine was diagnosed to contain high content of glucose and
ketone bodies. Based on this observation, answer the following:a.Which endocrine gland and hormone is related to this condition?
b.Name the cells on which this hormone acts.
c.What is the condition called and how can it be rectified?
3.Calcium plays a very important role in the formation of bones. Write on
the role of endocrine glands and hormones responsible for maintainingCalcium homeostasis.4. Illustrate the differences between the mechanism of action of a protein
and a steroid hormone.5.Hypothalamus is a super master endocrine gland. Elaborate.

