133133133133133133133133133133133133MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSCHAPTER 24MODEL ANSWERSTO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSThis chapter deals with model answers to all types of descriptive questions suchas Very Short Answer (VSA) type questions, Short Answers (SA) type questions
and Long Answer (LA) type questions. The questions are randomly selected fromdifferent units, the answers are suggestive and written to provide approach andway of presentation. They are categorised under three headings as follows:ANSWERS TO VSA TYPE QUESTIONS1.Identify the phylum in which adults exhibit radial symmetry and larva
exhibit bilateral symmetry.Ans.In phylum 
echinodermata, adults show radial symmetry whereas larvaeshow bilateral symmetry.2.What is the importance of pneumatic bones and air sacs in Aves?
Ans.Pneumatic bones in Aves keep the body light and thus help in flight. Airsacs help in respiration and buoyancy.3.What is metagenesis? Mention an example which exhibits this
phenomenon.Ans.Alteration of generation is known as metagenesis. 
Obelia exhibits thisphenomenon.4.Which segments in earthworm are covered by a prominent dark band or
clitellum?Ans.14th  - 16th segments.

134BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS5.What are sclerites present in cockroach?
Ans.In each segment  of the body of cockroach, exoskeleton has hardened
plates called sclerites.6.How many times do nymphs moult to reach the adult form of cockroach?
Ans.13 times moulting.
7.Identify the sex of a frog in which sound producing vocal sacs are present.
Ans.Male Frog.
8.What is the scientific term given to segments of earthworm?
Ans.M
etameres.9.A muscle fibre tapers at both ends and does not show striation. Identify
the muscle fibre.Ans.Smooth muscl
e fibre.10.Name the different cell junctions found in tissues.
Ans.a.Ti
ght Junctionsb.Adhering Junctions
c.Gap Junctions
11.Give two identifying features of an adult male frog.
Ans.a.V
ocal Sacs.b.Thumb pads/copulatory  pads in thumb.
12.Smaller, lipid soluble molecules diffuse faster through cell membrane,
but the movement of hydrophilic substances are facilitated by certainbimolecules named as ____________.Ans.P
rotein.13.Osmosis is a special kind of diffusion, in which water diffuses across the
cell membrane. The rate and direction of osmosis depends upon both
______________.Ans.Pressure and concentration gradient.14.A flowering plant is planted in an earthen pot and irrigated. Urea is
added to make the plant grow faster, but after some time the plant dies.
This may be due to _______ .Ans.E
xosmosis.
135135135135135135135135135135135135MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS15.Absorption of water from soil by dry seeds increases the _____________,
thus helping seedlings to come out of soilAns.Pressure.16.Water moves up against gravity and even for a tree of 20 m height, the
tip receives water within two hours. The most important physiologicalphenomenon which is responsible for the upward movement of water is_____________.Ans.Transpirational pull.
17.The cytoplasm in a plant cell is surrounded by both cell wall and cell
membrane. The specificity of transport of substances are mostly across
the cell membrane, because __________.Ans.The cell wall is freely permeable to water and substances in solutions
but membrane is selectively permeable.18.Examine the figure.
21a.Is this structure present in animal cell or plant cells?
b.Can these be passed on to the progeny? How?
c.Name the metabolic processes taking place in the part (1) and (2).
Ans.a.Plant 
cell.b.Yes, through female gametes.
c.In part (1) - Photophosphorylation.
In part (2) - Calvin cycle.19.2H
2O  2H+ + O2 + 4eŒBased on above equation, answer the following questions:a.Where does this reaction take place in plants?
b.What is the significance of this reaction?

136BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSAns.a.Lumen of
 the thylakoids.b.O
2 is evolved during this reaction, moreover electrons are madeavailable to PS-II continuously.20.Cyanobacteria and some other photosynthetic bacteria don™t have
chloroplasts. How do they conduct photosynthesis?Ans.Cyanobacteria and other photosynthetic bacteria have thylakoidssuspended freely in the cytoplasm (i.e., they are not enclosed inmembrane), and they have bacteriochlorophyll.21. a.NADP reductase enzyme is located on __________.
Ans.grana-lamellae.
b.Breakdown of proton  gradient leads to release of _________ .
Ans.energy.
22.Fill in the places with appropriate word/words.
a.A phase of growth which is the maximum and fastest is __________.
b.Apical  dominance  as expressed in dicotyledonous plants is due
to the presence of more ________ in the apical bud than in thelateralones.
c.In addition to auxin,  ________ must be supplied to culture medium
to obtain a good callus in plant  tissue culture.d.________ of a vegetative plants are the sites of photoperiodic
perception.Ans.a.exponential/log 
phase of an S-curve.b.auxin/IAA
c.cytokinin/Kinetin/6 BAP/Zeatin/etc.
d.leaves.
23.Plant growth substances (PGS) have innumerable practical applications.
Name the PGS you should use toa.Increase yield of sugar cane
b.Promote lateral shoot growth
c.Cause sprouting of potato tuber
d.Inhibit seed germination
Ans.a.GA
3/gibberellin/gibberellic acid.b.Cytokinin zeatin/kinetin/Kn.

137137137137137137137137137137137137MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSc.C2H4/Ethylene.
d.ABA/Abscissc acid.
24.The food mixes thoroughly with the acidic gastric juice of the stomach
by the churning movements of its muscular wall. What do we call thefood then?Ans.Chyme.25.Trypsinogen is an inactive enzyme of pancreatic juice. An enzyme,
enterokinase, activates it. Which tissue/ cells secrete this enzyme?Ans.In
testinal mucosa.26.In which part of alimentary canal does absorption of water, simple sugars
and alcohol takes place?Ans.Stomach.27.Name the enzymes involved in the breakdown of nucleotides into sugars
and bases?Ans.Nucleo
tidases and Nucleosidases.28.Define digestion in one sentence.
Ans.The process of conversion of complex food substances in the digestive
system to simple absorbable forms is called digestion.29.What do we call the type of teeth attachment to jaw bones in which each
tooth is embedded in a socket of jaw bones?Ans.Thecodont.30.Stomach is located in upper left portion of the abdominal cavity and has
three major parts. Name these three parts:Ans. Cardiac, fundic and pyloric.
31.Does gall bladder make bile?
Ans.No.
32.A fluid filled double membranous layer surrounds the lungs. Name it
and mention its important function.
138BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSAns.Pleural fluid is found in between the two membranes of lung and it
reduces the friction on the lung surface.33.Name the primary site of exchange of gases in our body?
Ans.Alveoli.34.Cigarette smoking causes emphysema. Give reason.
Ans.Cigarette smoking causes damage of the alveolar walls leading to
decreased respiratory surfaces for exchange of gases.35.What is the amount of O
2 supplied to tissues through every 100 mL. ofoxygenated blood under normal physiological conditions?Ans.5mL. of oxygen / 100 mL. of oxygenated blood.
36.A major percentage (97%) of O
2 is transported by RBCs in the blood.How is the remaining percentage (3%) of O2 transported?Ans.Through Plasma.
37.Name the blood component, which is viscous and straw coloured fluid.
Ans.Plasma.
38.Complete the missing word in the statement given below:
a.Plasma without _________ factors is called serum.
Ans.clotting.b.___________ and monocytes are phagocytic cells.
Ans.Neutrophils.c.Eosinophils are associated with _____ reactions.
Ans.allergic.d._______  ions play a significant role in clotting.
Ans.Calcium.
e.One can determine the heart beat rate by counting the number of
_________ in an ECG.Ans.QRS complex.
39.Name the vascular connection that exists between the digestive tract
and liver.
Ans.Hepatic 
portal system.40.Given below are the abnormal conditions related to blood circulation.
Name the disorders.
139139139139139139139139139139139139MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSa.Acute chest pain due to failure of O
2 supply to heart muscles.Ans.Angina.
b.Increased systolic pressure.
Ans.High blood pressure.
41.State the functions of the following in blood.
a.Fibrinogen
Ans.Blood coagulation
b.Globulin.
Ans.Immunity 
i.e., defence mechanism of bodyc.Neutrophils
Ans.Phagocytosis
d.Lymphocytes
Ans.Immunity
42.Name two actively transported substances in glomerular filtrate.
Ans.Glucose and aminoacids,
43.Mention any two metabolic disorders, which can be diagnosed by
analysis of urine.Ans.Glycosuria and Ketonuria,
44.What are main processes of urine formation?
Ans.The main processes are filtration, reabsorption, secretion and
concentration/ dilution,45.Sort the following into actively or passively transported substances during
reabsorption of GFR.Ans.Actively transported Œ glucose, aminoacids and Na
+Passively transported Œ nitrogenous wastes and water46.Name the cells/tissues in human body,
a.Which exhibit amoeboid movement.
Ans.macr
ophages.b.Which exhibit ciliary movement.
Ans.ciliated epitheli
um of nasal passage.c.Which exhibit muscular movement.
Ans.muscles of limbs and tongue.

140BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS47.Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular, _____,
and _______ systems.Ans.Skelet
al and Neural.48.The three tiny bones present in middle ear are called ear ossicles. Write
them in correct sequence begining from ear drum.Ans.ma
lleus, incus, stapes.49.Rearrange the following in the correct order of involvement in electrical
impulse movement-Synaptic knob, dendrites, cell body, Axon terminal, Axon.Ans.Dendrites - Cell body - Axon - Axon terminal -Synaptic knob.
50.Comment upon the role of ear in maintaining the balance of the body
and posture.Ans.The crista and macula are the specific receptors of the vestibular
apparatus responsible for maintenance of balance of the body andposture.51.Specific cells of the retina enable us to see coloured objects around us,
what are they?Ans.Cone cells of the retina enable us to see the coloured objects around us.52.Arrange the following in the order of reception and transmission of sound
wave from the external auditory canal:Cochlear nerve, ear drum, stapes, incus, malleus, cochlea.Ans.Ear drum,  m
alleus, incus, stapes, cochlea,  chochlear nerve.53.There are many endocrine glands in human body. Name the gland which
is absent in male and the one absent in female.Ans.In Males - Ovary. In Females - Testis.
54.Which of the two adrenocortical layers, zona glomerulosa and zona
reticularis lies outside enveloping the other?Ans.Outer layer - Zona glomerulosa
Inner layer - Zona reticularis55.What is erythropoiesis? Which hormone stimulates it?
Ans.Formation of RBC is known as erythropoiesis and the hormoneenythropoietin stimulates the process.
141141141141141141141141141141141141MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSANSWERS TO SA TYPE QUESTIONS1.Differentiate between:
a.Open Circulatory System and Closed Circulatory System
Ans.b.Oviparous and Viviparous.
Ans.c.Direct Development and Indirect Development
Ans.2.Fill up the blank spaces appropriately
Closed Circulatory SystemThe blood is circulated within anetwork of vessels.Open Circulatory SystemThe blood is pumped out of  the heartinto sinuses and the cells  and tissuesare directly bathed in it.ViviparousAnimals  which give birth to theiryoung ones are called viviparousOviparousAnimals which lay eggs are calledoviparousIndirect DevelopmentAnimals which have a larval stage,which do not resemble the adult intheir development are said to exhibitindirect development.Direct DevelopmentAnimals which do not have a larvalstage in their development  are saidto exhibit direct development.Phylum/ClassEx
cretory OrganCirculatory OrganRespiratory Organ
ArthropodaNephridia     ClosedSkin/Parapodia
Metanephridia     OpenAmphibia     Closed
LungLungs/ Gills/Tracheal System
Ans.A =Malpighian Tubule/ coxal glands/D =Mollusca
anternary glands/ green glandsB =OpenE =Feat
her like gillsC =AnnelidaF =Kidney
ABCDEF
142BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS3.Give two examples of roots that develop from different parts of the
angiospermic plant other than the radicle.Ans.The root that arise from parts of plant other than radicle are called
adventitious roots.Pneumatophores Œ for respirationStilt roots Œ for supportProp roots Œ for support.4.While eating peach or pear it is usually seen that some stone like
structures get entangled in the teeth, what are these stone like structurescalled?Ans.The structures that get entangled in the teeth while eating fruits like
peach and pear are actually the stone cells or brachysclereids which areunbranched, short and isodiametric type of sclereids. These stone cells
usually occur in groups and provide grit or stone like hardness that getentangled in the spaces between teeth.5.Palm is a monocotyledonous plant, yet it increases in girth. Why
and how?Ans.A palm tree is a monocotyledonous plant and like all other monocot the
stems do not have primary cambium in the vascular bundles. However,
with age the tree grows in diameter, though slowly, as a result of growth

of the ground tissue. A secondary cambium may be formed in the
hypodermal region of the stem. The later forms the conjunctive tissue
and patches of meristematic cell. The activity of the meristematic cells
result in the formation of secondary vascular bundles.6.Give the location of hepatic caeca in a cockroach? What is their function?
Ans.A ring of 6-8 blind t
ubules called hepatic caeca are present at the junctionof foregut and midgut.Hepatic ceaca secrete digestive juice.7.Frogs are beneficial for mankind, justify the statement.
Ans.Frogs are beneficial for mankind as they can eat some crop pests and
protect crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance as they are an importantcomponent of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. They are edible
in some countries.
143143143143143143143143143143143143MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS8.Common name of some animals are given in Column A, write their
scientific name in Column B.A Ba.Tiger
Panthera 
tigrisb.Peacock
Pavo cristatusc.Housefly
Musca domestica     9.When a freshly collected 
Spirogyra filament is kept in 10% potassiumnitrate solution, it is observed that the protoplasm shrinks in size:a.What is this phenomenon called?
b.What will happen if the filament is replaced in distilled water?
Ans.a.This phenomenon is 
called plasmolysis. (The shrinkage ofprotoplast from the cell wall under the influence of a strongsolution/ hypertonic solution is called plasmolysis.b.If filaments are replaced in water the protoplast starts swelling. It
comes in contact with cell wall and cell regains its original size.The swelling up of plasmolyzed protoplast under the influence of
a weak solution or water is called deplasmolysis10.How is sulphur important for plants? Name the amino acids in which it
is present.Ans.Sul
phur, 
besides being present in some 
amino acids essential for protein
synthesis, is also a constituent of several coenzymes, vitamins and
ferrodoxin which are involved in some biochemical pathway.11.How are organisms like 
Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus of  significancein nitrogen cycle?Ans.Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus carry out denitrification process whereinthe nitrate present in the soil is reduced to nitrogen thus contributing to
the atmospheric nitrogen.12.Carefully observe the following figure

144BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSa.Name the technique shown in the figure and the scientist who
demonstrated this technique for the first time?Ans.Hydroponics, Julius von Sachs.
b.Name atleast three plants for which this technique can be employed
for their commercial productionAns.Tomato
, seedless cucumber, 
lettuce.c.What is the significance of aerating tube and feeding funnel in this
set-up?Ans.Aerating tube ensures adequate aeration of the root for optimum
growth of the plant. The funnel is used to release water andnutrients into the container with nutrient solution. This solution
needs to be replaced every day or two for maximum growth.13.Which is the most crucial enzyme found in root nodules for N
2 fixation?Does it require a special pink coloured pigment for its functioning?Elaborate?Ans.Nitrogenase. Y
es, it does require the presence of a pink coloured pigment in
the nodule called leg-haemoglobin for its functioning. This pigment helpsin scavenging oxygen as nitrogenase functions under anaerobic condition.
14.Succulents are known to keep their stomata closed during the day to
check transpiration. How do they meet their photosynthetic CO2requirements?Ans.Succulent (water storing) plants such as cacti, euphorbias fix CO
2 intoorganic compound using PEP carboxylase at night, when the stomataare open.PEP + CO2  OAAOAA       Malic acidThe organic compound (malic acid) accumulates throughout the nightand is decarboxylated during the day to produce CO2.15.Chlorophyll  ‚a™ is the primary pigment for the light reaction. What are
accessory pigments? What is their role in photosynthesis?Ans.A
ccessory pigments are those pigments, which assist in photosynthesisby capturing energy from light of different wavelengths. e.g., chlorophyll-
b, Xanthophylls and carotenoids.Role in Photosynthesis:a.They absorb wavelength of light not absorbed by chlorophyll ‚a™
and transfer the energy to chlorophyll.b.They also protect chlorophyll a from photo-oxidation.

145145145145145145145145145145145145MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS16.Nicotiana tabacum, a Short Day Plant, when exposed to more than criticalperiod of light fails to flower. Explain.Ans.a.Some plants require a periodic  exposure to alternate light and
dark for its flowering response. This phenomenon is termedphotoperiodism.b.The requirement of light exposure is critical. The SDP plants, when
exposed to light period in excess of critical period fail to flower,
c.Those plants which require exposure to light period at critical or
more than critical period for its flowering response are calledlong-day-plant.d.Nicotiana tabacum, fails to flower if exposed to more than criticalperiod of light because it is a SDP.17.What are the structural characteristics of
a.Meristematic cells  near root tip
b.The  cells in the elongation zone of the root
Ans.a.The m
eristematic cells near root tip are characterised by:-rich protoplasm,
-large conspicuous nucleus

-thin and cellulosic cell wall-primary in nature
-fewer vacuoles
-greater number of mitochondria
-numerous (abundant) plasmodesmata
b.The cells in the elongation zone of a root are characterized by
-increased vacuolation

-enlarged size/dimension
-deposition of new cellulosic cell walls.
18.A gardener finds some broad-leaved dicot weeds growing in his lawns.
What can be done to get rid of the weeds efficiently?Ans.The dicotyledonous plant grow by their apical shoot meristems while
grasses (which make lawns) possess intercalary meristem. Certainauxins, such as synthetic 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) whenapplied in excess can damage the shoot apical meristems but they donot cause any damage to the intercalary meristems. Thus, when 2, 4-D
is sprayed on lawns, only the dicots get killed and the lawns become freeof weeds.
146BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS19.What is pancreas? Mention the major secretions of pancreas that are
helpful in digestion.Ans.Pancreas 
is a gland having exocrine and endocrine portions involved insecreting digestive enzymes as well as hormones.Major secretions of pancreas involved in digestion are inactive enzymeslisted below:a.Trypsinogen
b.Chymotrypsinogen
c.Procarboxypeptidases
d.Amylases
e.Lipases
f.Nucleases
20.Name the part of the alimentary canal where major absorption of digested
food takes place. What are the absorbed forms of different kinds of foodmaterials?Ans.Small intestine is the part of alimentary canal where digested food
materials are mainly absorbed.Amino acids (proteins), monosachharides like glucose, fructose galactose,etc. (carbohydrate) and fatty acids and glycerol (fats) are differentabsorbable forms of food materials.21.State the different modes of CO
2 transport in blood.Ans.Nearly 20-25% of CO
2 by RBCsNearly 70% of CO2 as bicarbonatesNearly 7% of CO2 as dissolved state in plasma.22.Compared to O
2, diffusion rate of CO2 through the diffusion membraneper unit difference in partial pr
essure is much higher. Explain.Ans.Solub
ility is an important factor deciding diffusion rate. As the solubilityof CO2 is 20-25 times higher than O2, diffusion of CO2 through thediffusion membrane per unit difference in partial pressure is much higher.
23.Differentiate between Blood and Lymph.
Ans.Blood is a connective tissue consisting of a fluid matrix, plasma and
formed elements (RBCs, WBCs & Platelets). Blood flows in blood vascularsystem comprising heart, artcries and veins.Lymph is a colourless fluid containing specialized lymphocytes
(imparting immunity to the body), but devoid of RBCs. Lymph flows inthe lymphatic system and it absorbs fats.
147147147147147147147147147147147147MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONS24.Briefly describe the following:
a.Atherosclerosis
b.Thrombocytes
Ans.Atherosclerosis: Sometimes deposition of calcium, fat, cholesterol andfibrous tissues occurs in the blood vessel (e.g., coronary artery) supplyingblood to the heart muscles. This condition makes the lumen of arteries
narrower affecting blood supply to heart; which leads to Coronary Artery
Disease (CAD) also referred to as atherosclerosis.Thrombocytes: Blood platelets are cell fragments produced frommegakaryocytes (they are special cells in the bone marrow) and alsoreferred as thrombocytes. Normal blood contains 1,50,000 - 3,50,000platelets mm3. Thrombocytes release a variety of substances likethrombokinase, most of which are involved in blood clothig. A significantdrop in the count of blood platelets can lead to Clotting disorders which
will lead to excessive blood loss from the body.  25.a.What is  the major site where RBCs are formed.
Ans.Bone marrow
b.Which part of the heart is responsible for initiating and maintaining
the rhythmic activity of the heart.Ans.Sino-Atrial Node (S.A. Node)
c.Name the reptile which has four chambered heart.
Ans.Crocodile26.What is the role played by Renin-Angiotensin in the regulation of kidney
function?Ans.Renin is released from JGA on activation due to fall in the glomerula
blood pressure/flow. Renin converts angiotensinogen in blood toangiotensin-I and further to angiotensin-II. Angiotensin-II being a
powerful vasoconstrictor, 
increase the glomerular blood pressure andthereby GFR. Angiotensin-II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na+ and water from thedistal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood pressureand thereby GFR. This is generally known as the Renin - Angiotensin
mechanism.27.The following parts in our body have specific name in Osteology, write
against each.  Ans.
a.Knee cap -patella
b.Collar bone -clanicle
c.Skull -
cranium
148BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS28.Write a few lines about Gout.
Ans.W
hen metabolic waste-uric acid crystals are accumulated in bones, thenit results into inflammation of bone and joints thereby causing pain.This disorder of skeletal system is called gout.29.What are the point for articulation of pelvic and pectoral girdles?
Ans.The components of pelvic girdle are ilium, ischium and pubis. Itarticulates with femur through acetabulum.The component of pectoral girdle are scapula and clavicle. It is theglenoid cavity of pectoral girdle in which head of humerus articulates.30.What is the role-played by lutenizing hormones in males and females
respectively?Ans.LH stimulates the synthesis and secretion of androgens called male
hormones. In females, LH is essential for ovulation.
In females, LH induces ovulation of fully mature follicles (graafian follicles)and maintains the corpus luteum formed from the remnants of thegraafian follicles after ovulation.31.What is the role of second messenger in hormone action?
Ans.Hormones which do not enter the target cell, interact with specific
receptors located on the surface of the target cell membranes andgenerates second messengers (e.g., CAMP) on the inner side of plasmamembrane. The second messenger, in turn, carries out all the hor
monalfunctions.32.Old people have weak immune system. What could be the reason?
Ans.Thymus is 
degenerated in old individual resulting in a decreasedproduction of thymosins. As a result the immune responses of oldpersons become weak.ANSWERS TO LA TYPE QUESTIONS1.With the help of a schematic diagram describe the haplo-diptontic life
cyclepattern in plants.
Ans.In a sexually reproducing plant there is an alternation of generation
between a haploid and a diploid phase of plant bodies. The haploidplantbody is 
termed gametophyte while the diploid plant body is calledsporophyte. The gametophyte produces gametes by mitosis while the
haploid spores are produced by sporophyte following meiosis (reduction
149149149149149149149149149149149149MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSdivision). Two gamete fuse together to produce a zygote which developsinto the diploid sporophyte.In a haplodiplontic life  cycle pattern, such as in bryophyta orpteridophyta both the phases of life are multicellular. However, in
bryophytes, the gametophytes are small, photosynthetic, independentand represent dominant phase. The partly or totally dependent,
sporophyte is physically attached to the gametophyte. The (n) spores
dispersed by sporophyte germinate into individual gametophytic plants.
However, in pteridopyhtes the 2n (diploid) phase is dominant, wellorganized, independent while the n phase though also freeliving and
independent is short lived and  photosynthetic. In both of these groups
of plants the mobile male gametes, antherozoid produced by sex organantheridium, travel to archegonium (bearing an egg cell) via the medium
of water. Egg cell is non motile hence the  reproduction is oogamous.
BAHaplo-diplonticSpores
(n)MeiosisGametophyte(n)SyngamyZygote(2n)GametogenesisSporophyte
(2n)(c)Diagram2.Lichen is usually cited as an example of ‚symbiosis™ in plants where
an algal and a fungal species live together for their mutual benefit.What will happen if algal and fungal partners are separated fromeach other?a.Both will survive and grow normally and independent from each other.
b.Both will die
c.Algal component will survive while the fungal component will die.
d.Fungal component will survive while algal partner will die.
Based on your answer how do you justify this association as symbiosis.
150BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSAns.Lichen is usually 
cited as an example of symbiosis in biology wherein a fungal and an algal species live together for mutual benefit. Thealgal component synthesizes the food through photosynthesis whichis utilized by the fungal species for its survival. The fungal componentin return provides shelter and waste products that are consumed byalgal species.Experiments though have shown that algal component can growindependently when separated from fungal species. But same is not truewith the fungal component which dies when separated from algalcomponent. This association is, therefore, a typical case of master- slave
relationship where fungus (master) has trapped the algal components
(slave) for its own survival while giving nothing in return to it . Someauthors consider this association as controlled parasitism or helotismdue to the fact that sometimes the fungus sends its haustoria into thealgal cells to derive  nourishment.3.Distinguish between families fabaceae, solanaceae, liliaceae on the basis
of gynoecium characteristics. Also write economic importance of any
one of the above family.Ans.a.Gynoecium
i.Fabaceae - Monocarpellary, ovary 
unilocular, ma
rginal
placentationii.Solanaceae - Bicarpellary syncarpous, carpels placed obliquely,
bilocular, 
axile placentationiii.L
iliaceae - Tricarpellary, syncarpous, ovary superior, axile
placentationb.Economic importance of fabacae.
i.Source of pulses (gram, arhar)
ii.Edible oil (soyabean, groundnut)
iii.dye (indigofera)iv.fibres (sunhemp)
v.fodder (Sesbani
a, Trifolium)vi.ornamental (lupin)
vii.Medicine (mulaithi)
4.The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known as placentation.
What does the term placenta refer to? Name the different types ofplacentation seen in plants. Draw any three types of placentation in
flowers as seen in T.S.
151151151151151151151151151151151151MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSAns.The 
ovules are female reproductive structures and borne in the ovary ofthe flower. The number, 
structure, their position in the ovary varies indifferent plants. They also differ in mode of attachment with the ovarywall. At the point of attachment there is a cellular ridge or cushion ofcells called placenta. The mode of attachment of ovule to the placenta isknown as placentation which is of the following types: (a) Parietal (b)
Marginal (c) Axile (d) Free central (e) Basal.(b)(c)(d)Axile Placentation   Parietal placentationFree central placentation
5.Explain the digestive system of cockroach with the help of a labelled
sketch.Ans.The 
digestive system consists of alimentary canal and digestive glands.The alimentary canal of cockroach is divided into foregut, midgut andhindgut. The   mouth opens into a short tubular pharynx, leading to anarrow tubular passage, the oesophagus, which opens into a sac likecrop used for storing food. The crop is followed by a gizzard orproventriculus. Gizzard consists of six - chitinous plates called teeth
which helps in grinding food. The entire foregut is lined by cuticle. Aring of six - eight blind tubular structures called hepatic or gastric caecaeis present at the junction of foregut and midgut which secrete digestivejuice. At the junction of midgut and hindgut is present another ring ofyellow colored thin filamentous malpighian tubules which help in
removal of excretory products from haemolymph. The hindgut is broaderthan midgut and is differentiated into ileum, colon and rectum. Therectum opens out through anus.6.It is observed that deficiency of a particular element showed its symptoms
initially in older leaves and then in younger leaves.a.Does it indicate that the element is actively mobilized or relatively
immobile? Name two elements which are highly mobile and two
which are relatively immobile.Ans.It is actively mobilized. Highly mobile- nitrogen, magnesium
Relatively immobile- calcium, boron
152BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSb.How is the aspect of mobility of elements important to horticulture
and agriculture?Ans.Symptom
s of deficiency of mobile elements are more pronouncedin older leaves and symptoms of deficiency of relatively immobileelement appear first in younger leaves. This information can beutilised by horticulturist and agriculturist to get a broad idea of
the deficiency elements in plants.7.Explain the mechanism of breathing with neat labelled sketches
Ans.Breat
hing involves two stages.a.Inspiration: Inspiration is initated by the contraction ofdiaphragm, which increases the volume of thoracic chamber inthe anterioposterior axis. The contraction of external inter-costal
muscles lifts up the ribs and the sternum causing an increase inthe volume of thoracic chamber in the dorso-ventral axis also. SuchSalivary glandPharynxSalivaryreservoir
OesophagusCrop
GizzardHepatic caecaMesentron
or midgutMalpighiantubulesIleumColonRectuman increase in thoracic volume leads to a similar increase inpulmonary volume resulting in decreased intra-pulmonarypressure to less than atmospheric pressure. This causes themovement of external air into the lungs. i.e., inspiration.b.Expiration:  The inter-costal muscles return the diaphragm and
sternum to their normal positions with relaxation of the diaphragm.
This reduces the thoracic volume and thereby the pulmonary
153153153153153153153153153153153153MODEL ANSWERS TO DESCRIPTIVE QUESTIONSvolume. As a result an increase in intra-pulmonary pressure toslightly above the atmospheric pressure causes the expulsion ofair from the lungs i.e., expiration.      8.Explain different types of blood groups and donor compatibility by
making a table.Ans.ABO bl
ood grouping is based on the presence or absence of two surfaceantigens on the RBCs namely A and B. Similarly, the plasma of differentindividuals contain two natural antibodies anti-A and anti-B. Blood
group ‚A™ carries antigen-A and antibodies-B. The donor™s group forblood group A are A and O. Blood group B carries antigen-B andantibodies-A. The donor™s group for blood group B are B and O. Bloodgroup AB carries antigens A and B but no corresponding antibodies so,
the compatible donor™s group for blood group AB are A, B, AB and O
hence, blood group ‚AB™ is also called as ﬁuniversal acceptorﬂ. Blood
group ‚O™ carries no antigens but carries antibodies both A and B hence
its compatible donor™s group is only ‚O™ but it is a compatible donor
group for all the blood groups. A, B, AB and O hence, blood group ‚O™ is
called as ‚universal donor™.Blood groups and donor compatibility9.Discuss the role of Ca
2+ ions in muscle contraction. Draw neat sketchesto illustrate your answer.Blood Group Antigen on RBCsAntibodi
es in PlasmaDonor™s Compatibility
AAAnti-BA. O
BBAnti-AB. O
ABA . BNilAB, A. B. O
ONilAnti - A, BO

