119119119119119119119119119119119119NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATIONCHAPTER 21NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Chemicals which are released at the synaptic junction are called
a.Hormones
b.Neurotransmitters
c.Cerebrospinal fluid
d.Lymph
2.Potential difference across resting membrane is negatively charged. This
is due to differential distribution of the following ionsa.Na
+ and K+ ionsb.CO
3++ and CI- ionsc.Ca
++ and Mg++ ionsd.Ca
+4 and CI-ions3.Resting membrane potential is maintained by
a.Hormones
b.Neurotransmitters
c.Ion pumps
d.None of the above
4.The function of our visceral organs is controlled by
a.Sympathetic and somatic neural system
b.Sympathetic and para sympathetic neural system
c.Central and somatic nervous system
d.None of the above
5.Which of the following is not involved in Knee-jerk reflex?
a.Muscle spindle
b.Motor neuron
c.Brain
d.Inter neurons

120BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS6.An area in the brain which is associated with strong emotions is
a.Cerebral cortex
b.Cerebellum
c.Limbic system
d.Medulla
7.Mark the vitamin present in Rhodopsin
a.Vit A
b.Vit B
c.Vit C
d.Vit D
8.Human eyeball consists of three layers and it encloses
a.Lens, iris, optic nerve
b.Lens, aquous humor and vitreous humor
c.Cornea, lens, iris
d.Cornea, lens, optic nerve
9.Wax gland present in the ear canal is called
a.Sweat gland
b.Prostate gland
c.Cowper™s gland
d.Sebaceous gland/ ceruminous gland
10.The part of internal ear responsible for hearing is
a.Cochlea
b.Semicircular canal
c.Utriculus
d.Sacculus
11.The organ of corti is a structure present in
a.External ear
b.Middle ear
c.Semi circular canal
d.Cochlea
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Rearrange the following in the correct order of involvement in electrical
impulse movement-Synaptic knob, dendrites, cell body, Axon terminal, Axon
121121121121121121121121121121121121NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION2.Comment upon the role of ear in maintaining the balance of the body
and posture.3.Which cells of the retina enable us to see coloured objects around us?
4.Arrange the following in the order of reception and transmission of sound
wave from the ear drum:Cochlear nerve, external auditory canal, ear drum, stapes, incus, malleus,cochlea.5.During resting potential, the axonal membrane is polarised, indicate
the movement of +ve and Œve ions leading to  polarisationdiagrammatically.6.Name the structures involved in the protection of the brain.
7.Our reaction like aggressive behaviour, use of abusive wor
ds, restlessnessetc. are regulated by brain, name the parts involved.8.What do grey and white matter in the brain represent?
9.Where is the hunger centre located in human brain?
10.Which sensory organ is involved in vertigo  (sensation of oneself or objects
spinning around)?11.While travelling at a higher altitude, a person complains of dizziness
and vomiting sensation. Which part of the inner ear is disturbed duringthe journey?12.Complete the statement by choosing appropriate match among the
following -a.Resting potentiali.
chemicals involved in the transmissionof impulses at synapses.b.Nerve impulseii.gap between the pre synaptic and post
synaptic neuronsc.Synaptic cleft
iii.electrical potential difference across the
resting neural membraned.Neurotransmittersiv.an el
ectrical wave like response of a neuron to a stimulation.SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.The major parts of the human neural system is depicted below. Fill in
the empty boxes with appropriate words.
122BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS2.What is the difference between electrical transmission and chemical
transmission?3.Neural system and computers share certain common features. Comment
in five lines. (Hint: CPU, input-output devices).4.If someone receives a blow on the back of neck, what would be the effect
on the person™s CNS?5.What is the function ascribed to Eustachian tube?
6.Label the following parts in the given diagram using arrow.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Explain the process of the transport and release of a neurotransmitter
with the help of a labelled diagram showing a complete neuron, axonterminal and synapse.2.Name the parts of human forebrain indicating their respective functions.
3.Explain the structure of middle and internal ear with the help of diagram.
a.Aqueous chamber
b.Cornea
c.Lens
d.Retina
e.Vitreous chamber
f.Blind spot

