101101101101101101101101101101101101BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATIONCHAPTER 18BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS1.Mark, among the following a cell which does not exhibit phagocytotic
activitya.Monocytes
b.Neutrophil
c.Basophil
d.Macrophage
2.One of the common symptoms observed in people infected with Dengue
fever isa.Significant decrease in RBC count
b.Significant decrease in WBC count
c.Significant decrease in platelets count
d.Significant increase in platelets count
3.Which among the followings is correct during each cardiac cycle?
a.The volume of blood pumped out by the Rt and Lt ventricles is same.
b.The  volume of blood pumped out by the Rt and Lt ventricles is
differentc.The volume of blood received by each atrium is different
d.The volume of blood received by the aorta and pulmonary artery
is different4.Cardiac activity could be moderated by the autonomous neural system.
Tick the correct answer:
a.The parasympathetic system stimulates heart rate and stroke
volumeb.The sympathetic system stimulates heart rate and stroke volume
c.The parasympathetic system decreases the heart rate but increase
stroke volumed.The sympathetic system decreases the heart rate but increase
stroke volume
102BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS5.Mark the pair of substances among the following which is essential for
coagulation of blood.a.Heparin and calcium ions
b.Calcium ions and platelet factors
c.Oxalates and citrates
d.Platelet factors and heparin
6.ECG depicts the depolarisation and repolarisation processes during the
cardiac cycle. In the ECG of a normal healthy individual one of thefollowing waves is not represented.a.Depolarisation of atria
b.Repolarisation of atria
c.Depolarisation of ventricles
d.Repolarisation of ventricles
7.Which one of the following type of cells lack nucleus?
a.RBC
b.Neutrophils
c.Eosinosphils
d.Monocytes
8.Which one of the following blood cells is involved in antibody production.
a.B-Lymphocytes
b.T-Lymphocytes
c.RBC
d.Neutrophils
9.The cardiac impulse is initiated and conducted further upto ventricle.
The correct sequence of conduction of impulse isa.S A NodeA V NodePurkinje fiberA  V Bundle
b.S A NodePurkinje fiberA V NodeA V Bundle
c.S A NodeA V NodeA V BundlePurkinje fiber
d.S A NodePurkinje fiberA V BundleA V Node
10.The cells involved in inflammatory reactions are
a.Basophils
b.Neutrophils
c.Eosinophils
d.Lymphocytes

103103103103103103103103103103103103BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION11.The second heart sound (dubb) is associated with the closure of
a.Tricuspid valve
b.Semilunar valves
c.Bicuspid valve
d.Tricuspid and bicuspid valves.
12.Which of the following correctly explains a phase/ event in cardiac cycle
in a standard electrocardiogram?a.QRS complex indicates atrial contraction.
b.QRS complex indicates ventricular contraction.
c.Time between S and T represents atrial systole.
d.P-wave indicates beginning of ventricular contraction.
13.Which of the following statements is incorrect?
a.A person of ‚O™ blood group has anti ‚A™ and anti ‚B™ antibodies in
his blood plasma.b.A person of ‚B™ blood group can™t donate blood to a person of ‚A™
blood group.c.Blood group is designated on the basis of the presence of antibodies
in the blood plasma.d.A person of AB blood group is universal recipient.
14.What would be the cardiac output of a person having 72 heart beats per
minute and a stroke volume of 50 ml?a.360 mL
b.3600 mL
c.7200 mL
d.5000 mL
15.Match the terms given under Column ‚A™ with their functions given under
Column ‚B™ and select the answer from the options given below:Column AColumn B
A.Lymphatic Systemi.Carries oxygenated blood
B.Pulmonary veinii.Immune Response

C.Thrombocytes
iii.To drain back the tissue fluid
to the circulatory systemD.Lymphocytesiv
.Coagulation of blood

104BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSOptions:a.A-ii, B-i, C-iii, D-iv
b.A-iii, B-i, C-iv, D-ii
c.A-iii, B-i, C-iii, D-iv
d.A-ii, B-i, C-iii, D-iv
16.Read the following statements and choose the correct option
Statement 1 : Atria receive blood from all parts of the body whichsubsequently flows to ventricles.Statement 2 : Action potential generated at sino-atrial node passes fromatria to ventricles.a.Action mentioned in Statement 1 is dependent on action mentioned
in Statement 2b.Action mentioned in Statement 2 is dependent on action mentioned
in Statement 1c.Action mentioned in Statements 1 and 2 are independent of each
other.
d.Action mentioned in Statements 1 and 2 are synchronous.
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Name the blood component which is viscous and straw coloured fluid.
2.Complete the missing word in the statement given below:
a.Plasma without _________ factors is called serum.
b.___________ and monocytes are phagocytic cells.
c.Eosinophils are associated with _____ reactions.
d._______  ions play a significant role in clotting.
e.One can determine the heart beat rate by counting the number of
_________ in an ECG.3.Given below is the diagrammatic representation of a standard ECG. Label
its different peaks.
105105105105105105105105105105105105BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION4.Name the vascular connection that exists between the digestive tract
and liver.
5.Given below are the abnormal conditions related to blood circulation.
Name the disorders.a.Acute chest pain due to failure of O
2 supply to heart musclesb.Increased systolic pressure
6.Which coronary artery diseases is caused due to narrowing of the lumen
of arteries?7.Define the following terms and give their location?
a.Purkinje fibre
b.Bundle of His
8.State the functions of the following in blood
a.Fibrinogen
b.Globulin
c.Neutrophils
d.Lymphocytes
9.What physiological circumstances lead to  erythroblastosis foetalis?
10.Explain the consequences of a situation in which blood does not
coagulate.11.What is the significance of time gap in the passage of action potential
from sino-atrial node to the ventricle?12.How will you interpret an electrocardiogram (ECG) in which time taken
in QRS complex is higher.SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.The walls of ventricles are much thicker than atria. Explain.
2.Differentiate between
a.Blood and Lymph
b.Basophils and Eosinophils
c.Tricuspid and bicuspid valve
3.Briefly describe the followings:
a.Anaemia
b.Angina Pectoris

106BIOLOGY, EXEMPLAR PROBLEMSc.Atherosclerosis
d.Hypertension
e.Heart failure
f.Erythroblastosis foetalis
4.Explain the advantage of the complete partition of ventricle among birds
and mammals and hence leading to double circulation.5.What is the significance of hepatic portal system in the circulatory
system?6.Explain the functional significance of lymphatic system?
7.Write the features that distinguish between the two
a.Plasma and Serum
b.Open and closed circulatory system
c.Sino-atrial node and Atrio-ventricular node
8.Thrombocytes are essential for coagulation of blood. Comment.
9.Answer the following
a.Name the  major site where RBCs are formed.
b.Which part of heart is responsible for initating and maintaining its
rhythmic activity?c.What is specific in the heart of crocodiles among reptilians?

107107107107107107107107107107107107BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATIONLONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS1.Explain Rh-incompatibility in humans.
2.Describe the events in cardiac cycle. Explain ﬁdouble circulationﬂ.
3.Explain different types of blood groups and donor compatibility by
making a table.4.Write short note on the following
a.Hypertension
b.Coronary Artery Disease
5.In  the diagrammatic presentation of heart given below, mark and label,
SAN, AVN, AV bundles, bundle of His and Purkinje fibres.

