Autolithography :Bed: Ben Day Tints: Bite: Black Letter: Bleed: Blind Stamping or Tooling: Block: Block Book: Blocking: Body: Bold Face: Bolts: Book Hand: Book Sizes: Box Wood: Brochure:  Drawing original work on the stone or plate as distinct from chromolithography in which a drawing or painting is copied by a professional lithographic artist or photolithography in which the work is transferred to the plate photographically. Autolithography is not restricted to any form of lithographic drawing and can be in colour or black and white, with pen, chalk, airbrush, ben day tints or splatter.  The table of a press or machine on which the forme lies.  Named after the American inventor, mechanical tints applied to line blocks.  The action of acid in the etching of a metal plate.  An alternative term for a type face based on the gothic hand of the late middle ages.  An illustration or block which spreads over the margin to the edge of the page.  The impression of a design on the leather cover of a book without using ink, gold or foil. The heated tool makes the leather somewhat darker, when impressed.  A generic term applied to any relief printing surface other than type or typographic ornament.  A popular type of book printed entirely from woodblocks. They were perhaps the earliest form of printed books but continued in production in the Netherlands long after Gutenberg™s invention.  The impression of a design or lettering on a book cover by machine.  The shank of the type.  Type with a heavy black appearance, but in the same style as the medium weight of the font.  The folded edges of a sheet or section of a book on three sides which will eventually be trimmed off.  A formal style of handwriting as used by professional, copiers of books before the invention of printing such as uncial, half uncial, caroline minuscule, cancellaresca.  The standard sizes (in inches) of British books (untrimmed). Hard wood used as end grain blocks for wood engraving.  A pamphlet or other small work which has its pages stitched but not bound. GLOSSARYBurin: Burnisher: Calligraphy:  Capitals: Dabber: Deckle: Em: Emblems: En: End Papers: Engraving: Etching: Face: Fecit, fee., f.: Figuravit: Format: Forme:   A graver or tool used for engraving on either metal or wood.  A smooth curved metal tool used in copper plate engraving for polishing the plate surface when making corrections or additional work. Special burnishers are used for gold leaf work (agate) and for taking impressions by hand from a woodblock.  Decorative handwritingor handwritten lettering. The creation and practice of pen scripts to adorn and decorate books, documents and letters for the church, the law or  commerce. Large letters such as A E B D which derive from Roman inscriptional lettering.  An inking pad of cotton, silk or leather.  The rough edge of hand-made paper. Spacing metal, the square of any size of type, popularly known as a mutton. A 12 pt or pica em is the printer's unit of measurement and all areas of type on the page are expressed in ems. Approximately 1/6ﬂ.  (Icons) are more effective than a written name, especially for logos being translated into many alphabet; for instance, a name in the Arabic language would be of little help in most European markets. A sign or emblem would keep the general proprietary nature of the product in both markets. In non-profit areas, the Red Cross (which goes by Red Crescent in certain countries) is an example of an extremely well known emblem which does not need an accompanying name. Branding aims to facilitate cross-language marketing. For example, a soft drink company™s logo can be identified in any language because of the standards of colour and design. Half an em, popularly known as a nut.  Leaves of paper at front and end of a book which help to secure the body of the book to its case or binding. At one time they were decorated with a printed pattern or marbling, now more usually quite plain.  A generic term used loosely to cover all methods of printing a picture. Properly, it refers to copper plate engraving with a burin in which the subject is rendered and printed in intaglio. See Appendix.  Using acid to erode areas of a metal plate instead of engraving with the burin. See Appendix.  The printing surface of a type.  A term used in the lettering of old prints to denote ‚etched™ or occasionally ‚engraved™.  A term used on old prints meaning ‚drew™, and particularly a drawing made from a painting which is in process of being reproduced.  The size and layout of a book or other printed work.  The complete type and blocks necessary for printing a sheet, usually containing 2, 4, 8, or more pages, imposed and locked up in achase. 103GLOSSARY
