GEOMORPHIC PROCESSESCHAPTERAfter learning about how the earth wasborn, how it evolved its crust and otherinner layers, how its crustal platesmoved and are moving, and other informationon earthquakes, the forms of volcanism and
about the rocks and minerals the crust is
composed of, it is time to know in detail about
the surface of the earth on which we live. Letus start with this question.Why is the surface of the earth uneven?The earth™s crust is dynamic. You are wellaware that it has moved and moves verticallyand horizontally. Of course, it moved a bit fasterin the past than the rate at which it is movingnow. The differences in the internal forces
operating from within the earth which built upthe crust have been responsible for thevariations in the outer surface of the crust. The
earth™s surface is being continuously subjectedto external forces induced basically by energy(sunlight). Of course, the internal forces are still
active though with different intensities. Thatmeans, the earth™s surface is beingcontinuously subjected to by external forcesoriginating within the earth™s atmosphere andby internal forces from within the earth. Theexternal forces are known as exogenic forcesand the internal forces are known as endogenicforces. The actions of exogenic forces result inwearing down (degradation) of relief/elevations
and filling up (aggradation) of basins/depressions, on the earth™s surface. Thephenomenon of wearing down of relief
variations of the surface of the earth througherosion is known as gradation. The endogenicforces continuously elevate or build up partsof the earth™s surface and hence the exogenic
processes fail to even out the relief variationsof the surface of the earth. So, variations remainas long as the opposing actions of exogenic and
endogenic forces continue. In general terms,the endogenic forces are mainly land buildingforces and the exogenic processes are mainly
land wearing forces. The surface of the earth issensitive. Humans depend on it for theirsustenance and have been using it extensivelyand intensively. So, it is essential to understandits nature in order to use it effectively without
disturbing its balance and diminishing itspotential for the future. Almost all organismscontribute to sustain the earth™s environment.However, humans have caused extensivedamage to the environment through over useof resources. Use we must, but must also leaveit potential enough to sustain life through thefuture. Most of the surface of the earth had andhas been shaped over very long periods of time
(hundreds and thousands of years) andbecause of its use and misuse by humans itspotential is being diminished at a fast rate. If
the processes which shaped and are shapingthe surface of the earth into varieties of forms(shapes) and the nature of materials of which
it is composed of, are understood, precautionscan be taken to minimise the detrimental effectsof human use and to preserve it for posterity.GEOMORPHIC PROCESSESYou would like to know the meaning ofgeomorphic processes. The endogenic andexogenic forces causing physical stresses andchemical actions on earth materials and
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY46bringing about changes in the configurationof the surface of the earth are known as
geomorphic processes. Diastrophism andvolcanism are endogenic geomorphicprocesses. These have already been discussed
in brief in the preceding unit. Weathering, mass
wasting, erosion and deposition are exogenicgeomorphic processes. These exogenicprocesses are dealt with in detail in this chapter.Any exogenic element of nature (like water,ice, wind, etc.,) capable of acquiring and
transporting earth materials can be called a
geomorphic agent. When these elements of
nature become mobile due to gradients, theyremove the materials and transport them overslopes and deposit them at lower level.
Geomorphic processes and geomorphic agents
especially exogenic, unless stated separately,
are one and the same.A process is a force applied on earthmaterials affecting the same.  An agent is a
mobile medium (like running water, moving ice
masses, wind, waves and currents etc.) which
removes, transports and deposits earth
materials. Running water, groundwater,
glaciers, wind, waves and currents, etc., canbe called geomorphic agents.Do you think it is essential to distinguishgeomorphic agents and geomorphic
processes?Gravity besides being a directional forceactivating all downslope movements of matteralso causes stresses on the earth™s materials.Indirect gravitational stresses activate wave andtide induced currents and winds. Withoutgravity and gradients there would be no
mobility and hence no erosion, transportationand deposition are possible. So, gravitationalstresses are as important as the other
geomorphic processes. Gravity is the force thatis keeping us in contact with the surface and itis the force that switches on the movement of
all surface material on earth. All the movementseither within the earth or on the surface of theearth occur due to gradients Š from higher
levels to lower levels, from high pressure to lowpressure areas etc.ENDOGENIC PROCESSES
The energy emanating from within the earth isthe main force behind endogenic geomorphic
processes. This energy is mostly generated byradioactivity, rotational and tidal friction andprimordial heat from the origin of the earth.
This energy due to geothermal gradients and
heat flow from within induces diastrophism
and volcanism in the lithosphere. Due tovariations in geothermal gradients and heat flow
from within, crustal thickness and strength,
the action of endogenic forces are not uniform
and hence the tectonically controlled original
crustal surface is uneven.DiastrophismAll processes that move, elevate or build upportions of the earth™s crust come under
diastrophism. They include: (i) orogenicprocesses involving mountain building
through severe folding and affecting long and
narrow belts of the earth™s crust; (ii) epeirogenicprocesses involving uplift or warping of large
parts of the earth™s crust; (iii) earthquakes
involving local relatively minor movements;
(iv) plate tectonics involving horizontalmovements of crustal plates.In the process of orogeny, the crust isseverely deformed into folds. Due to epeirogeny,there may be simple deformation. Orogeny is
a mountain building process whereas
epeirogeny is continental building process.
Through the processes of orogeny, epeirogeny,
earthquakes and plate tectonics, there can be
faulting and fracturing of the crust. All these
processes cause pressure, volume and
temperature (PVT) changes which in turn
induce metamorphism of rocks.Epeirogeny and orogeny, cite thedifferences.VolcanismVolcanism includes the movement of moltenrock (magma) onto or toward the earth™ssurface and also formation of many intrusive
and extrusive volcanic forms. Many aspects of
volcanism have already been dealt in detail
GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES47processes and their respective driving forces.It should become clear from this chart that for
each process there exists a distinct driving forceor energy.As there are different climatic regions onthe earth™s surface owing to thermal gradientscreated by latitudinal, seasonal and land andwater spread variations, the exogenicgeomorphic processes vary from region to
region.  The density, type and distribution of
vegetation which largely depend uponunder volcanoes in the Unit II and underigneous rocks in the preceding chapter in thisunit.What do the words volcanism andvolcanoes indicate?EXOGENIC PROCESSESThe exogenic processes derive their energyfrom atmosphere determined by the ultimate
energy from the sun and also the gradientscreated by tectonic factors.Why do you think that the slopes orgradients are created by tectonic factors?Gravitational force acts upon all earthmaterials having a sloping surface and tend toproduce movement of matter in down slopedirection. Force applied per unit area is calledstress. Stress is produced in a solid by pushingor pulling. This induces deformation. Forces
acting along the faces of earth materials areshear stresses (separating forces). It is thisstress that breaks rocks and other earth
materials. The shear stresses result in angular
displacement or slippage. Besides the
gravitational stress earth materials become
subjected to molecular stresses that may be
caused by a number of factors amongst whichtemperature changes, crystallisation and
melting are the most common. Chemical
processes normally lead to loosening of bonds
between grains, dissolving of soluble minerals
or cementing materials. Thus, the basic reason
that leads to weathering, mass movements, and
erosion is development of stresses in the body
of the earth materials.As there are different climatic regions onthe earth™s surface the exogenic geomorphic
processes vary from region to region.
Temperature and precipitation are the two
important climatic elements that controlvarious processes.All the exogenic geomorphic processes arecovered under a general term, denudation. Theword ‚denude™ means to strip off or to uncover.Weathering, mass wasting/movements, erosion
and transportation are included in denudation.The flow chart (Figure 6.1) gives the denudationprecipitation and temperature exert influenceindirectly on exogenic geomorphic processes.
Within different climatic regions there may be
local variations of the effects of different climatic
elements due to altitudinal differences, aspect
variations and the variation in the amount of
insolation received by north and south facing
slopes as compared to east and west facing
slopes. Further, due to differences in windvelocities and directions, amount and kind of
precipitation, its intensity, the relation between
precipitation and evaporation, daily range of
temperature, freezing and thawing frequency,
depth of frost penetration, the geomorphic
processes vary within any climatic region.What is the sole driving force behind allthe exogenic processes?Climatic factors being equal, the intensityof action of exogenic geomorphic processesdepends upon type and structure of rocks. Theterm structure includes such aspects of rocks
as folds, faults, orientation and inclination ofbeds, presence or absence of joints, beddingplanes, hardness or softness of constituentminerals, chemical susceptibility of mineralconstituents; the permeability or impermeabilityFigure 6.1 : Denudational processes and theirdriving forces
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY48etc. Different types of rocks with differences intheir structure offer varying resistances to
various geomorphic processes. A particularrock may be resistant to one process and non-resistant to another. And, under varying
climatic conditions, particular rocks may
exhibit different degrees of resistance togeomorphic processes and hence they operateat differential rates and give rise to differences
in topography. The effects of most of the
exogenic geomorphic processes are small and
slow and may be imperceptible in a short time
span, but will in the long run affect the rocks
severely due to continued fatigue.Finally, it boils down to one fact that thedifferences on the surface of the earth thoughoriginally related to the crustal evolution
continue to exist in some form or the other due
to differences in the type and structure of earth
materials, differences in geomorphic processes
and in their rates of operation.Some of the exogenic geomorphic processeshave been dealt in detail here.WEATHERINGWeathering is action of elements of weather andclimate over earth materials.  There are a
number of processes within weathering whichact either individually or together to affect theearth materials in order to reduce them to
fragmental state.Weathering is defined as mechanicaldisintegration and chemical decom-
position of rocks through the actions ofvarious elements of weather and climate.
As very little or no motion of materialstakes place in weathering, it is an in-situ oron-site process.Is this little motion which can occursometimes due to weathering synonymouswith transportation?  If not, why?Weathering processes are conditioned bymany complex geological, climatic, topographicand vegetative factors.  Climate is of particularimportance. Not only weathering processesdiffer from climate to climate, but also the depth
of the weathering mantle (Figure 6.2).Figure 6.2 : Climatic regimes and depth of weatheringmantles (adapted and modified from Strakhov, 1967)ActivityMark the latitude values of differentclimatic regimes in Figure 6.2 andcompare the details.There are three major groups of weatheringprocesses : (i) chemical; (ii) physical ormechanical; (iii) biological weathering processes.
Very rarely does any one of these processes everoperate completely by itself, 
but quite often adominance of one process can be seen.Chemical Weathering ProcessesA group of weathering processes viz; solution,carbonation, hydration, oxidation and
reduction act on the rocks to decompose,
dissolve or reduce them to a fine clastic state
through chemical reactions by oxygen, surface
and/or soil water and other acids.  Water and
air (oxygen and carbon dioxide) along withheat must be present to speed up all chemical
reactions. Over and above the carbon dioxide
present in the air, decomposition of plants and
animals increases the quantity of carbon
dioxide underground. These chemical
reactions on various minerals are very much
similar to the chemical reactions in a laboratory.SolutionWhen something is dissolved in water or acids,the water or acid with dissolved contents is
GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES49called solution.  This process involves removalof solids in solution and depends uponsolubility of a mineral in water or weak acids.On coming in contact with water many solidsdisintegrate and mix up as suspension inwater. Soluble rock forming minerals likenitrates, sulphates, and potassium etc. areaffected by this process. So, these minerals are
easily leached out without leaving any residuein rainy climates and accumulate in dryregions. Minerals like calcium carbonate and
calcium magnesium bicarbonate present inlimestones are soluble in water containingcarbonic acid (formed with the addition ofcarbon dioxide in water), and are carried awayin water as solution. Carbon dioxide producedby decaying organic matter along with soil
water greatly aids in this reaction. Commonsalt (sodium chloride) is also a rock formingmineral and is susceptible to this process of
solution.CarbonationCarbonation is the reaction of carbonate andbicarbonate with minerals and is a commonprocess helping the breaking down of

feldspars and carbonate minerals. Carbondioxide from the atmosphere and soil air isabsorbed by water, to form carbonic acid that
acts as a weak acid. Calcium carbonates andmagnesium carbonates are dissolved incarbonic acid and are removed in a solution
without leaving any residue resulting in caveformation.HydrationHydration is the chemical addition of water.Minerals take up water and expand; this
expansion causes an increase in the volume of
the material itself or rock. Calcium sulphate
takes in water and turns to gypsum, which is
more unstable than calcium sulphate. This
process is reversible and long, continued
repetition of this process causes fatigue in therocks and may lead to their disintegration.Many clay minerals swell and contract duringwetting and drying and a repetition of thisprocess results in cracking of overlyingmaterials. Salts in pore spaces undergo rapid
and repeated hydration and help in rockfracturing. The volume changes in mineralsdue to hydration will also help in physical
weathering through exfoliation and granulardisintegration.Oxidation and ReductionIn weathering, oxidation means a combinationof a mineral with oxygen to form oxides orhydroxides.  Oxidation occurs where there isready access to the atmosphere andoxygenated waters. The minerals mostcommonly involved in this process are iron,
manganese, sulphur etc. In the process ofoxidation rock breakdown occurs due to thedisturbance caused by addition of oxygen. Red
colour of iron upon oxidation turns to brownor yellow. When oxidised minerals are placedin an environment where oxygen is absent,reduction takes place. Such conditions existusually below the water table, in areas of
stagnant water and waterlogged ground. Redcolour of iron upon reduction turns to greenishor bluish grey.These weathering processes are inter-related. Hydration, carbonation and oxidationgo hand in hand and hasten the weathering
process.Can we give iron rusting as an exampleof oxidation? How essential is water in
chemical weathering processes? Canchemical weathering processes dominatein water scarce hot deserts?Physical Weathering ProcessesPhysical or mechanical weathering processesdepend on some applied forces. The appliedforces could be: (i) gravitational forces such asoverburden pressure, load and shearing stress;
(ii) expansion forces due to temperaturechanges, crystal growth or animal activity;
(iii) water pressures controlled by wetting and
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY50drying cycles. Many of these forces are appliedboth at the surface and within different earth
materials leading to rock fracture. Most of the
physical weathering processes are caused by
thermal expansion and pressure release. Theseprocesses are small and slow but can cause
great damage to the rocks because of
continued fatigue the rocks suffer due to
repetition of contraction and expansion.Unloading and ExpansionRemoval of overlying rock load because ofcontinued erosion causes vertical pressurerelease with the result that the upper layers of
the rock expand producing disintegration of
rock masses. Fractures will develop roughly
parallel to the ground surface. In areas of
curved ground surface, arched fractures tend
to produce massive sheets or exfoliation slabs
of rock. Exfoliation sheets resulting from
expansion due to unloading and pressure
release may measure hundreds or even
thousands of metres in horizontal extent. Large,smooth rounded domes called exfoliationdomes (Figure 6.3) result due to this process.temperatures, this internal movement amongthe mineral grains of the superficial layers ofrocks takes place regularly. This process ismost effective in dry climates and high
elevations where diurnal temperature changesare drastic. As has been mentioned earlierthough these movements are very small they
make the rocks weak due to continued fatigue.The surface layers of the rocks tend to expandmore than the rock at depth and this leads to
the formation of stress within the rock resultingin heaving and fracturing parallel to thesurface. Due to differential heating and
resulting expansion and contraction of surfacelayers and their subsequent exfoliation fromthe surface results in smooth rounded surfaces
in rocks. In rocks like granites, smoothsurfaced and rounded small to big boulderscalled tors form due to such exfoliation.What is the difference between exfoliationdomes and exfoliated tors?Freezing, Thawing and Frost WedgingFrost weathering occurs due to growth of icewithin pores and cracks of rocks duringrepeated cycles of freezing and melting. Thisprocess is most effective at high elevations in
mid-latitudes where freezing and melting isoften repeated. Glacial areas are subject to frostwedging daily. In this process, the rate of
freezing is important. Rapid freezing of water
causes its sudden expansion and high pressure.The resulting expansion affects joints, cracks
and small inter granular fractures to become
wider and wider till the rock breaks apart.Salt WeatheringSalts in rocks expand due to thermal action,hydration and crystallisation. Many salts like
calcium, sodium, magnesium, potassium and
barium have a tendency to expand. Expansion
of these salts depends on temperature and
their thermal properties. High temperature
ranges between 30 and 50oC of surfacetemperatures in deserts favour such saltexpansion. Salt crystals in near-surface poresFigure 6.3 : A large exfoliation dome in granite rocknear bhongir (Bhuvanagiri) town in Andhra PradeshTemperature Changes and Expansion
Various minerals in rocks possess their ownlimits of expansion and contraction. With risein temperature, every mineral expands andpushes against its neighbour and astemperature falls, a corresponding contraction
takes place. Because of diurnal changes in the
GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES51cause splitting of individual grains withinrocks, which eventually fall off. This process offalling off of individual grains may result ingranular disintegration or granular foliation.Salt crystallisation is most effective of allsalt-weathering processes.  In areas withalternating wetting and drying conditions salt
crystal growth is favoured and the neighbouringgrains are pushed aside. Sodium chloride and
gypsum crystals in desert areas heave up
overlying layers of materials and with the result
polygonal cracks develop all over the heaved
surface. With salt crystal growth, chalk breaksdown most readily, followed by limestone,sandstone, shale, gneiss and granite etc.BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY AND WEATHERINGBiological weathering is contribution to orremoval of minerals and ions from the
weathering environment and physical changesdue to growth or movement of organisms.Burrowing and wedging by organisms like
earthworms, termites, rodents etc., help in
exposing the new surfaces to chemical attackand assists in the penetration of moisture andair. Human beings by disturbing vegetation,
ploughing and cultivating soils, also help in
mixing and creating new contacts between air,
water and minerals in the earth materials.
Decaying plant and animal matter help in the
production of humic, carbonic and other acidswhich enhance decay and solubility of someelements. Plant roots exert a tremendous
pressure on the earth materials mechanically
breaking them apart.SPECIAL EFFECTS OF WEATHERINGExfoliationThis has already been explained underphysical weathering processes of unloading,thermal contraction and expansion and salt
weathering. Exfoliation is a result but not a
process. Flaking off of more or less curved
sheets of shells from over rocks or bedrockresults in smooth and rounded surfaces(Figures 6.3; 6.4). Exfoliation can occur dueto expansion and contraction induced bytemperature changes. Exfoliation domes andtors result due to unloading and thermalexpansion respectively.SIGNIFICANCE OF WEATHERINGWeathering processes are responsible forbreaking down the rocks into smaller
fragments and preparing the way for formationof not only regolith and soils, but also erosionand mass movements. Biomes and bio-
diversity is basically a result of forests
(vegetation) and forests depend upon the depth
of weathering mantles. Erosion cannot besignificant if the rocks are not weathered. That
means, weathering aids mass wasting, erosion
and reduction of relief and changes in
landforms are a consequence of erosion.
Weathering of rocks and deposits helps in the
enrichment and concentrations of certainvaluable ores of iron, manganese, aluminium,copper etc., which are of great importance for
the national economy. Weathering is an
important process in the formation of soils.When rocks undergo weathering, somematerials are removed through chemical
or physical leaching by groundwater and
thereby the concentration of remaining
(valuable) materials increases.  Without
such a weathering taking place, the
concentration of the same valuablematerial may not be sufficient andeconomically viable to exploit, process and
refine.  This is what is called enrichment.Fig.6.4 : Exfoliation (Flacking) and granulardisintegration
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY52the three forms of movements. Figure 6.5 showsthe relationships among different types of mass
movements, their relative rates of movementand moisture limits.Figure 6.5 : Relationships among different types ofmass movements, their relative rates of movementand moisture limits (after Whitehead, 2001)MASS MOVEMENTSThese movements transfer the mass of rockdebris down the slopes under the directinfluence of gravity. That means, air, water or
ice do not carry debris with them from place toplace but on the other hand the debris maycarry with it air, water or ice. The movements
of mass may range from slow to rapid,affecting shallow to deep columns of materialsand include creep, flow, slide and fall.  Gravity
exerts its force on all matter, both bedrock andthe products of weathering. So, weathering isnot a pre-requisite for mass movement though
it aids mass movements. Mass movements arevery active over weathered slopes rather thanover unweathered materials.Mass movements are aided by gravity andno geomorphic agent like running water,
glaciers, wind, waves and currents participate
in the process of mass movements. That meansmass movements do not come under erosionthough there is a shift (aided by gravity) of
materials from one place to another. Materialsover the slopes have their own resistance todisturbing forces and will yield only when forceis greater than the shearing resistance of thematerials. Weak unconsolidated materials,
thinly bedded rocks, faults, steeply dippingbeds, vertical cliffs or steep slopes, abundantprecipitation and torrential rains and scarcity
of vegetation etc., favour mass movements.Several activating causes precede massmovements. They are : (i) removal of support
from below to materials above through naturalor artificial means; (ii) increase in gradient andheight of slopes; (iii) overloading through
addition of materials naturally or by artificialfilling; (iv) overloading due to heavy rainfall,saturation and lubrication of slope materials;
(v)  removal of material or load from over theoriginal slope surfaces; (vi) occurrence ofearthquakes, explosions or machinery;
(vii) excessive natural seepage; (viii) heavydrawdown of water from lakes, reservoirs andrivers leading to slow outflow of water from
under the slopes or river banks; (ix) indis-criminate removal of natural vegetation.Heave (heaving up of soils due to frostgrowth and other causes), flow and slide areMass movements can be grouped undertwo major classes: (i) slow movements;(ii) rapid movements.Slow MovementsCreep is one type under this category whichcan occur on moderately steep, soil coveredslopes.  Movement of materials is extremely
slow and imperceptible except throughextended observation. Materials involved canbe soil or rock debris.  Have you ever seen fence
posts, telephone poles lean downslope fromtheir vertical position and in their linearalignment? If you have, that is due to the creep
effect. Depending upon the type of materialinvolved, several types of creep viz., soil creep,talus creep, rock creep, rock-glacier creep etc.,
can be identified. Also included in this groupis solifluction which involves slow downslopeflowing soil mass or fine grained rock debrissaturated or lubricated with water. This processis quite common in moist temperate areaswhere surface melting of deeply frozen ground
and long continued rain respectively, occurfrequently. When the upper portions getsaturated and when the lower parts areimpervious to water percolation, flowing occursin the upper parts.
GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES53Rapid MovementsThese movements are mostly prevalent inhumid climatic regions and occur over gentleto steep slopes. Movement of water-saturated
clayey or silty earth materials down low-angle
terraces or hillsides is known as earthflow.Quite often, the materials slump making step-
like terraces and leaving arcuate scarps at theirheads and an accumulation bulge at the toe.
When slopes are steeper, even the bedrock
especially of soft sedimentary rocks like shale
or deeply weathered igneous rock may slide
downslope.Another type in this category is mudflow.In the absence of vegetation cover and with
heavy rainfall, thick layers of weathered
materials get saturated with water and either
slowly or rapidly flow down along definite
channels.  It looks like a stream of mud within
a valley. When the mudflows emerge out of
channels onto the piedmont or plains, they can
be very destructive engulfing roads, bridges
and houses. Mudflows occur frequently on the
slopes of erupting or recently erupted volcanoes.Volcanic ash, dust and other fragments turn
into mud due to heavy rains and flow down as
tongues or streams of mud causing great
destruction to human habitations.A third type is the debris avalanche, whichis more characteristic of humid regions withor without vegetation cover and occurs in
narrow tracks on steep slopes. This debris
avalanche can be much faster than the
mudflow.  Debris avalanche is similar to snow
avalanche.In Andes mountains of South Americaand the Rockies mountains of North
America, there are a few volcanoes whicherupted during the last decade and verydevastating mudflows occurred downtheir slopes during eruption as well as
after eruption.LandslidesThese are relatively rapid and perceptiblemovements. The materials involved arerelatively dry. The size and shape of thedetached mass depends on the nature ofdiscontinuities in the rock, the degree ofweathering and the steepness of the slope.
Depending upon the type of movement of
materials several types are identified in this
category.Slump is slipping of one or several units ofrock debris with a backward rotation withrespect to the slope over which the movementtakes place (Figure 6.6). Rapid rolling or slidingof earth debris without backward rotation ofmass is known as debris slide. Debris fall isnearly a free fall of earth debris from a vertical
or overhanging face.  Sliding of individual rock
masses down bedding, joint or fault surfaces
is rockslide. Over steep slopes, rock sliding isvery fast and destructive. Figure 6.7 shows
landslide scars over steep slopes. Slides occur
as planar failures along discontinuities like
bedding planes that dip steeply. Rock fall is
free falling of rock blocks over any steep slope
keeping itself away from the slope. Rock falls
occur from the superficial layers of the rockFigure 6.6 : Slumping of debris with backward rotation
Figure 6.7 : Landslide scars in Shiwalik Himalayan r
angesnear river Sarada at India-Nepal border, Uttar Pradesh

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY54face, an occurrence that distinguishes it fromrockslide which affects materials up to a
substantial depth.Between mass wasting and massmovements, which term do you feel is
most appropriate?  Why? Can solifluction
be included under rapid flow movements?
Why it can be and can™t be?In our country, debris avalanches and
landslides occur very frequently in theHimalayas.  There are many reasons forthis.  One, the Himalayas are tectonicallyactive.  They are mostly made up of
sedimentary rocks and unconsolidatedand semi-consolidated deposits.  Theslopes are very steep. Compared to the
Himalayas, the Nilgiris borderingTamilnadu, Karnataka, Kerala and theWestern Ghats along the west coast are
relatively tectonically stable and aremostly made up of very hard rocks; but,still, debris avalanches and landslidesoccur though not as frequently as in  theHimalayas, in these hills.  Why?  Many
slopes are steeper with almost verticalcliffs and escarpments in the WesternGhats and Nilgiris. Mechanical  weatheringdue to temperature changes and rangesis pronounced.  They receive heavyamounts of rainfall over short periods.
So, there is almost direct rock fall quitefrequently in these places along withlandslides and debris avalanches.
EROSION AND DEPOSITIONErosion involves acquisition and transportationof rock debris. When massive rocks break into
smaller fragments through weathering andany other process, erosional geomorphicagents like running water, groundwater,glaciers, 
wind and waves remove andtransport it to other places depending uponthe dynamics of each of these agents. Abrasion
by rock debris 
carried by these geomorphicagents also aids greatly in erosion. By erosion,relief degrades, i.e., the landscape is worndown. That 
means, though weathering aidserosion it is not a pre-condition for erosion totake place. Weathering, mass-wasting and
erosion are degradational processes. It is
erosion that is largely responsible for
continuous changes that the earth™s surface is
undergoing. As indicated in Figure 6.1,
denudational processes like erosion and
transportation are controlled by kinetic energy.
The erosion and transportation of earth
materials is brought about by wind, running
water, glaciers, waves and ground water. Ofthese the first three agents are controlled by
climatic conditions. They represent three states
of matter Šgaseous (wind), liquid (running
water) and solid (glacier) respectively.Can you compare the three climaticallycontrolled agents?The erosion can be defined as ﬁapplicationof the kinetic energy associated with the agentto the surface of the land along which it movesﬂ.Kinetic energy is computed as KE = 1/2 mv2where ‚m™ is the mass and ‚v™ is the velocity.Hence the energy available to perform work will
depend on the mass of the material and thevelocity with which it is moving. Obviously thenyou will find that though the glaciers move at
very low velocities due to tremendous mass are
more effective as the agents of erosion and wind,being in gaseous state, is less effective.The work of the other two agents of erosion-waves and ground water is not controlled byclimate. In case of waves it is the location along
the interface of litho and hydro sphere Š
coastal region Š that will determine the work
of waves, whereas the work of ground water isdetermined more by the lithological characterof the region. If the rocks are permeable and
soluble and water is available only then karst
topography develops. In the next chapter we
shall be dealing with the landforms produced
by each of these agents of erosion.Deposition is a consequence of erosion.  Theerosional agents loose their velocity and hence
energy on gentler slopes and the materials
carried by them start to settle themselves. In
other words, deposition is not actually the work
of any agent. The coarser materials get
