PHYSIOGRAPHY
This unit deals with
• Structure and Relief; physiographic divisions
• Drainage systems: concept of water sheds — the Himalayan
and the Peninsular
UNIT
II
2015-16(20/01/2015)
Do you know that our earth also has a
history. The earth and its landforms
that we see today have evolved over a
very long time. Current estimation shows that
the earth is approximately 460 million years old.
Over these long years, it has undergone many
changes brought about primarily by the
endogenic and exogenic forces. These forces have
played a significant role in giving shape to various
surface and subsurface features of the earth. You
have already studied about the Plate Tectonics
and the movement of the Earth’s plates in the
book Fundamentals of Physical Geography
(NCERT, 2006). Do you know that the Indian
plate was to the south of the equator millions of
years ago? Do you also know that it was much
larger in size and the Australian plate was a part
of it? Over millions of years, this plate broke into
many parts and the Australian plate moved
towards the southeastern direction and the
Indian plate to the north. Can you map different
phases in the movement of the Indian plate? This
northward movement of the Indian plate is still
continuing and it has significant consequences
on the physical environment of the Indian
subcontinent. Can you name some important
consequences of the northward movement of the
Indian plate?
It is primarily through the interplay of these
endogenic and exogenic forces and lateral
movements of the plates that the present geological
structure and geomorphologic processes active
in the Indian subcontinent came into existence.
Based on the variations in its geological structure
and formations, India can be divided into three
geological divisions. These geological regions
broadly follow the physical features:
(i) The Penisular Block
(ii) The Himalayas and other Peninuslar
Mountains
(iii) Indo-Ganga-Brahmaputra Plain.
THE PENINSULAR BLOCK
The northern boundary of the Peninsular
Block may be taken as an irregular line
running from Kachchh along the western flank
of the Aravali Range near Delhi and then
roughly parallel to the Yamuna and the Ganga
as far as the Rajmahal Hills and the Ganga
delta. Apart from these, the Karbi Anglong and
the Meghalaya Plateau in the northeast and
Rajasthan in the west are also extensions of
this block. The northeastern parts are
separated by the Malda fault in West Bengal
from the Chotanagpur plateau. In Rajasthan,
the desert and other desert–like features
overlay this block.
The Peninsula is formed essentially by a
great complex of very ancient gneisses and
granites, which constitutes a major part of it.
Since the Cambrian period, the Peninsula has
been standing like a rigid block with the
exception of some of its western coast which
is submerged beneath the sea and some other
parts changed due to tectonic activity without
affecting the original basement. As a part of
the Indo-Australian Plate, it has been subjected
to various vertical movements and block
faulting. The rift valleys of the Narmada, the
Tapi and the Mahanadi and the Satpura block
mountains are some examples of it. The
Peninsula mostly consists of relict and residual
mountains like the Aravali hills, the Nallamala
hills, the Javadi hills, the Veliconda hills, the
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
C H A P T E R
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 9
Palkonda range and the Mahendragiri hills, etc.
The river valleys here are shallow with low
gradients.
You are aware of the method of calculating
the gradient as a part of your study of the book
Practical Work in Geography– Part I (NCERT,
2006). Can you calculate the gradient of the
Himalayan and the Peninsular rivers and draw
the comparisons?
Most of the east flowing rivers form deltas
before entering into the Bay of Bengal. The
deltas formed by the Mahanadi, the Krishna,
the Kaveri and the Godavari are important
examples.
THE HIMALAYAS AND OTHER
PENINSULAR MOUNTAINS
The Himalayas along with other Peninsular
mountains are young, weak and flexible in their
geological structure unlike the rigid and stable
Peninsular Block. Consequently, they are still
subjected to the interplay of exogenic and
endogenic forces, resulting in the development of
faults, folds and thrust plains. These mountains
are tectonic in origin, dissected by fast-flowing
rivers which are in their youthful stage. Various
landforms like gorges, V-shaped valleys, rapids,
waterfalls, etc. are indicative of this stage.
INDO-GANGA-BRAHMAPUTRA PLAIN
The third geological division of India
comprises the plains formed by the river
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
Originally, it was a geo-synclinal depression
which attained its maximum development
during the third phase of the Himalayan
mountain formation approximately about 64
million years ago. Since then, it has been
gradually filled by the sediments brought by
the Himalayan and Peninsular rivers. Average
depth of alluvial deposits in these plains
ranges from 1,000-2,000 m.
It is evident from the above discussion that
there are significant variations among the
different regions of India in terms of their
geological structure, which has far-reaching
impact upon other related aspects. Variations
in the physiography and relief are important
among these. The relief and physiography of
India has been greatly influenced by the
geological and geomorphological processes
active in the Indian subcontinent.
PHYSIOGRAPHY
‘Physiography’ of an area is the outcome of
structure, process and the stage of
development. The land of India is characterised
by great diversity in its physical features. The
north has a vast expanse of rugged topography
consisting of a series of mountain ranges with
varied peaks, beautiful valleys and deep gorges.
The south consists of stable table land with
highly dissected plateaus, denuded rocks and
developed series of scarps. In between these
two lies the vast north Indian plain.
Based on these macro variations, India can
be divided into the following physiographic
divisions:
(1) The Northern and North-eastern
Mountains
(2) The Northern Plain
(3) The Peninsular Plateau
(4) The Indian Desert
(5) The Coastal Plains
(6) The Islands.
The North and Northeastern Mountains
The North and Northeastern Mountains consist
of the Himalayas and the Northeastern hills.
The Himalayas consist of a series of parallel
mountain ranges. Some of the important
ranges are the Greater Himalayan range,
which includes the Great Himalayas and
Figure 2.1 : A Gorge
2015-16(20/01/2015)
10 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 2.2 : India : Physical
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 11
the Trans-Himalayan range, the Middle
Himalayas and the Shiwalik. The general
orientation of these ranges is from northwest to
the southeast direction in the northwestern part
of India. Himalayas in the Darjiling and Sikkim
regions lie in an eastwest direction, while in
Arunachal Pradesh they are from southwest to
the northwest direction. In Nagaland, Manipur
and Mizoram, they are in the northsouth
direction. The approximate length of the Great
Himalayan range, also known as the central
axial range, is 2,500 km from east to west, and
their width varies between 160-400 km from
north to south. It is also evident from the map
that the Himalayas stand almost like a strong
and long wall between the Indian subcontinent
and the Central and East Asian countries.
Himalayas are not only the physical barrier,
they are also a climatic, drainage and cultural
divide. Can you identify the impact of Himalayas
on the geoenvironment of the countries of South
Asia? Can you find some other examples of
similar geoenvironmental divide in the world?
There are large-scale regional variations
within the Himalayas. On the basis of relief,
alignment of ranges and other geomorphological
features, the Himalayas can be divided into the
following sub-divisions:
(i) Kashmir or Northwestern Himalayas
(ii) Himachal and Uttaranchal Himalayas
(iii) Darjiling and Sikkim Himalayas
(iv) Arunachal Himalayas
(v) Eastern Hills and Mountains.
Kashmir or Northwestern Himalayas
It comprise a series of ranges such as the
Karakoram, Ladakh, Zaskar and Pir Panjal. The
northeastern part of the Kashmir Himalayas is a
cold desert, which lies between the Greater
Himalayas and the Karakoram ranges. Between
the Great Himalayas and the Pir Panjal range,
lies the world famous valley of Kashmir and the
famous Dal Lake. Important glaciers of South
Asia such as the Baltoro and Siachen are also
found in this region. The Kashmir Himalayas are
also famous for Karewa
formations, which are useful
for the cultivation of Zafran,
a local variety of saffron.
Some of the important
passes of the region are Zoji
La on the Great Himalayas,
Banihal on the Pir Panjal,
Photu La on the Zaskar and Khardung La on
the Ladakh range. Some of the important fresh
lakes such as Dal and Wular and salt water lakes
such as Pangong Tso and Tso Moriri are also in
this region. This region is drained by the river
Indus, and its tributaries such as the Jhelum
and the Chenab. The Kashmir and northwestern
Himalayas are well-known for their scenic
beauty and picturesque landscape. The
landscape of Himalayas is a major source of
attraction for adventure tourists. Do you know
that some famous places of pilgrimage such as
Vaishno Devi, Amarnath Cave, Charar -e-Sharif,
etc. are also located here and large number of
pilgrims visit these places every year?
Srinagar, capital city of the state of Jammu
and Kashmir is located on the banks of Jhelum
river. Dal Lake in Srinagar presents an
interesting physical feature. Jhelum in the valley
of Kashmir is still in its youth stage and yet forms
meanders – a typical feature associated with the
mature stage in the evolution of fluvial land form
(Figure 2.4). Can you name some other fluvial
landforms in the mature stage of a river?
Figure 2.3 : The Himalayas
Karewas
Karewas are the
thick deposits of
glacial clay and
other materials
embedded with
moraines.
Figure 2.4 : Meandering Jhelum
2015-16(20/01/2015)
12 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The southernmost part of this region consists
of longitudinal valleys known as ‘duns’. Jammu
dun and Pathankot dun are important examples.
The Himachal and Uttarakhand Himalayas
This part lies approximately between the Ravi
in the west and the Kali (a tributary of
Ghaghara) in the east. It is drained by two major
river systems of India, i.e. the Indus and the
Ganga. Tributaries of the Indus include the river
Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj, and the
tributaries of Ganga flowing through this
region include the Yamuna and the Ghaghara.
The northernmost part of the Himachal
Himalayas is an extension of the Ladakh cold
desert, which lies in the Spiti subdivision of
district Lahul and Spiti. All the three ranges of
Himalayas are prominent in this section also.
These are the Great Himalayan range, the Lesser
Himalayas (which is locally known as
Dhaoladhar in Himachal Pradesh and Nagtibha
in Uttarakhand) and the Shiwalik range from
the North to the South. In this section of Lesser
Himalayas, the altitude between 1,000-2,000
m specially attracted to the British colonial
administration, and subsequently, some of the
important hill stations such as Dharamshala,
Mussoorie, Shimla, Kaosani and the
cantonment towns and health resorts such as
Shimla, Mussoorie, Kasauli, Almora,
Lansdowne and Ranikhet, etc. were developed
in this region.
The two distinguishing features of this
region from the point of view of physiography
are the ‘Shiwalik’ and ‘Dun formations’. Some
important duns located in this region are the
An Interesting Fact
In Kashmir Valley, the meanders in Jhelum
river are caused by the local base level
provided by the erstwhile larger lake of which
the present Dal Lake is a small part.
Figure 2.5 : Western Himalayas
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 13
Chandigarh-Kalka dun, Nalagarh dun, Dehra
Dun, Harike dun and the Kota dun, etc. Dehra
Dun is the largest of all the duns with an
approximate length of 35-45 km and a width
of 22-25 km. In the Great Himalayan range,
the valleys are mostly inhabited by the
Bhotia’s. These are nomadic groups who
migrate to ‘Bugyals’ (the summer glasslands
in the higher reaches) during summer months
and return to the valleys during winters. The
famous ‘Valley of flowers’ is also situated in this
region. The places of pilgrimage such as the
Gangotri, Yamunotri, Kedarnath, Badrinath
and Hemkund Sahib are also situated in this
part. The region is also known to have five
famous Prayags (river confluences) as
mentiond in Chapter 3 of this book. Can you
name some other famous prayags in other
parts of the country?
The Darjiling and Sikkim Himalayas
They are flanked by Nepal Himalayas in the
west and Bhutan Himalayas in the east. It is
relatively small but is a most significant part
of the Himalayas. Known for its fast-flowing
rivers such as Tista, it is a region of high
mountain peaks like Kanchenjunga
(Kanchengiri), and deep valleys. The higher
reaches of this region are inhabited by Lepcha
tribes while the southern part, particularly the
Darjiling Himalayas, has a mixed population
of Nepalis, Bengalis and tribals from Central
India. The British, taking advantage of the
physical conditions such as moderate slope,
thick soil cover with high organic content, well
distributed rainfall throughout the year and
mild winters, introduced tea plantations in this
region. As compared to the other sections of
the Himalayas, these along with the Arunachal
Himalayas are conspicuous by the absence of
the Shiwalik formations. In place of the
Shiwaliks here, the ‘duar formations’ are
important, which have also been used for the
development of tea gardens. Sikkim and
Darjiling Himalayas are also known for their
scenic beauty and rich flora and fauna,
particularly various types of orchids.
The Arunachal Himalayas
These extend from the east of the Bhutan
Himalayas up to the Diphu pass in the east.
The general direction of the mountain range is
from southwest to northeast. Some of the
important mountain peaks of the region are
Kangtu and Namcha Barwa. These ranges are
dissected by fast-flowing rivers from the north
to the south, forming deep gorges.
Bhramaputra flows through a deep gorge after
crossing Namcha Barwa. Some of the
important rivers are the Kameng, the
The Shiwalik
The word shiwalik has its origin in the
geological formation found in and around
a place called Sivawala near Dehra Dun
which was once a headquarter of the
Imperial Survey and which subsequently
established its permanent headquarters
at Dehra Dun.
Figure 2.6 : Himalayan Mountain Complex : Cross Sectional View from South to North
South North
2015-16(20/01/2015)
14 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Subansiri, the Dihang, the Dibang and the
Lohit. These are perennial with the high rate of
fall, thus, having the highest hydro-electric
power potential in the country. An important
aspect of the Arunachal Himalayas is the
numerous ethnic tribal community inhabiting
in these areas. Some of the prominent ones
from west to east are the Monpa, Abor, Mishmi,
Nyishi and the Nagas. Most of these
communities practise Jhumming. It is also
known as shifting or slash and burn
cultivation. This region is rich in biodiversity
which has been preserved by the indigenous
Figure 2.7 : Eastern Himalayas
communities. Due to rugged topography, the
inter-valley transportation linkages are
nominal. Hence, most of the interactions are
carried through the duar region along the
Arunachal-Assam border.
The Eastern Hills and Mountains
These are part of the Himalayan mountain
system having their general alignment from the
north to the south direction. They are known
by different local names. In the north, they are
known as Patkai Bum, Naga hills, the Manipur
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 15
Figure 2.8 : Mizo Hills
Figure 2.9 : Loktak Lake
hills and in the south as Mizo or Lushai hills.
These are low hills, inhabited by numerous
tribal groups practising Jhum cultivation.
Most of these ranges are separated from each
other by numerous small rivers. The Barak is
an important river in Manipur and Mizoram.
The physiography of Manipur is unique by
the presence of a large lake known as ‘Loktak’
lake at the centre, surrounded by mountains
from all sides. Mizoram which is also known
as the ‘Molassis basin’ which is made up of
soft unconsolidated deposits. Most of the rivers
in Nagaland form the tributary of the
Brahmaputra. While two rivers of Mizoram and
Manipur are the tributaries of the Barak river,
which in turn is the tributary of Meghna; the
rivers in the eastern part of Manipur are the
tributaries of Chindwin, which in turn is a
tributary of the Irrawady of Myanmar.
The Northern Plains
The northern plains are formed by the
alluvial deposits brought by the rivers – the
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
These plains extend approximately 3,200 km
from the east to the west. The average width
of these plains varies between 150-300 km.
The maximum depth of alluvium deposits
varies between 1,000-2,000 m. From the
north to the south, these can be divided into
three major zones: the Bhabar, the Tarai and
the alluvial plains. The alluvial plains can be
further divided into the Khadar and the
Bhangar.
Bhabar is a narrow belt ranging between
8-10 km parallel to the Shiwalik foothills at
the break-up of the slope. As a result of this,
the streams and rivers coming from the
mountains deposit heavy materials of rocks
and boulders, and at times, disappear in this
zone. South of the Bhabar is the Tarai belt,
with an approximate width of 10-20 km where
most of the streams and rivers re-emerge
without having any properly demarcated
channel, thereby, creating marshy and
swampy conditions known as the Tarai. This
has a luxurious growth of natural vegetation
and houses a varied wild life.
The south of Tarai is a belt consisting of
old and new alluvial deposits known as the
Bhangar and Khadar respectively. These
plains have characteristic features of mature
stage of fluvial erosional and depositional
landforms such as sand bars, meanders, oxbow
lakes and braided channels. The
Brahmaputra plains are known for their
riverine islands and sand bars. Most of these
areas are subjected to periodic floods and
shifting river courses forming braided streams.
The mouths of these mighty rivers also form
some of the largest deltas of the world, for
example, the famous Sunderbans delta.
Otherwise, this is a featureless plain with a
general elevation of 50-150 m above the mean
sea level. The states of Haryana and Delhi form
a water divide between the Indus and the
Ganga river systems. As opposed to this, the
Brahmaputra river flows from the northeast to
the southwest direction before it takes an
2015-16(20/01/2015)
16 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
almost 90° southward turn at Dhubri before
it enters into Bangladesh. These river valley
plains have a fertile alluvial soil cover which
supports a variety of crops like wheat, rice,
sugarcane and jute, and hence, supports a
large population.
The Peninsular Plateau
Rising from the height of 150 m above the river
plains up to an elevation of 600-900 m is the
irregular triangle known as the Peninsular
plateau. Delhi ridge in the northwest, (extension
of Aravalis), the Rajmahal hills in the east, Gir
range in the west and the Cardamom hills in
the south constitute the outer extent of the
Peninsular plateau. However, an extension of
this is also seen in the northeast, in the form of
Shillong and Karbi-Anglong plateau. The
Peninsular India is made up of a series of
patland plateaus such as the Hazaribagh
plateau, the Palamu plateau, the Ranchi
plateau, the Malwa plateau, the Coimbatore
Figure 2.10 : Northern Plain
Figure 2.11 : A Part of Peninsular Plateau
plateau and the Karnataka plateau, etc. This
is one of the oldest and the most stable
landmass of India. The general elevation of the
plateau is from the west to the east, which is
also proved by the pattern of the flow of rivers.
Name some rivers of the Peninsular plateau
which have their confluence in the Bay of
Bengal and the Arabian sea and mention some
landforms which are typical to the east flowing
rivers but are absent in the west flowing rivers.
Some of the important physiographic features
of this region are tors, block mountains, rift
valleys, spurs, bare rocky structures, series of
hummocky hills and wall-like quartzite dykes
offering natural sites for water storage. The
western and northwestern part of the plateau
has an emphatic presence of black soil.
This Peninsular plateau has undergone
recurrent phases of upliftment and
submergence accompanied by crustal faulting
and fractures. (The Bhima fault needs special
mention, because of its recurrent seismic
activities). These spatial variations have
brought in elements of diversity in the relief of
the Peninsular plateau. The northwestern part
of the plateau has a complex relief of ravines
and gorges. The ravines of Chambal, Bhind and
Morena are some of the well-known examples.
On the basis of the prominent relief
features, the Peninsular plateau can be divided
into three broad groups:
(i) The Deccan Plateau
(ii) The Central Highlands
(iii) The Northeastern Plateau.
The Deccan Plateau
This is bordered by the Western Ghats in the
west, Eastern Ghats in the east and the
Satpura, Maikal range and Mahadeo hills in
the north. Western Ghats are locally known
by different names such as Sahyadri in
Maharashtra, Nilgiri hills in Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu and Anaimalai hills and
Cardamom hills in Kerala. Western Ghats are
comparatively higher in elevation and more
continuous than the Eastern Ghats. Their
average elevation is about 1,500 m with the
height increasing from north to south.
‘Anaimudi’ (2,695 m), the highest peak of
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 17
Peninsular plateau is located on the Anaimalai
hills of the Western Ghats followed by Dodabetta
(2,637 m) on the Nilgiri hills. Most of the
Peninsular rivers have their origin in the
Western Ghats. Eastern Ghats comprising the
discontinuous and low hills are highly eroded
by the rivers such as the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna, the Kaveri, etc. Some of
the important ranges include the Javadi hills,
the Palconda range, the Nallamala hills, the
Mahendragiri hills, etc. The Eastern and the
Western Ghats meet each other at the Nilgiri hills.
The Central Highlands
They are bounded to the west by the Aravali
range. The Satpura range is formed by a series
of scarped plateaus on the south, generally at
an elevation varying between 600-900 m above
the mean sea level. This forms the
northernmost boundary of the Deccan plateau.
It is a classic example of the relict mountains
which are highly denuded and form
discontinuous ranges. The extension of the
Peninsular plateau can be seen as far as
Jaisalmer in the West, where it has been
covered by the longitudinal sand ridges and
crescent-shaped sand dunes called barchans.
This region has undergone metamorphic
processes in its geological history, which can
be corroborated by the presence of
metamorphic rocks such as marble, slate,
gneiss, etc.
The general elevation of the Central
Highlands ranges between 700-1,000 m above
the mean sea level and it slopes towards the
north and northeastern directions. Most of the
tributaries of the river Yamuna have their origin
in the Vindhyan and Kaimur ranges. Banas is
the only significant tributary of the river
Chambal that originates from the Aravalli in
the west. An eastern extension of the Central
Highland is formed by the Rajmahal hills, to
the south of which lies a large reserve of
mineral resources in the Chotanagpur
plateau.
The Northeastern Plateau
In fact it is an extension of the main Peninsular
plateau. It is believed that due to the force
exerted by the northeastward movement of the
Indian plate at the time of the Himalayan
origin, a huge fault was created between the
Rajmahal hills and the Meghalaya plateau.
Later, this depression got filled up by the
deposition activity of the numerous rivers.
Today, the Meghalaya and Karbi Anglong
plateau stand detached from the main
Peninsular Block. The Meghalaya plateau is
further sub-divided into three: (i) The Garo
Hills; (ii) The Khasi Hills; (iii) The Jaintia Hills,
named after the tribal groups inhabiting this
region. An extension of this is also seen in the
Karbi Anglong hills of Assam. Similar to the
Chotanagpur plateau, the Meghalaya plateau
is also rich in mineral resources like coal, iron
ore, sillimanite, limestone and uranium. This
area receives maximum rainfall from the south
west monsoon. As a result, the Meghalaya
plateau has a highly eroded surface.
Cherrapunji displays a bare rocky surface
devoid of any permanent vegetation cover.
The Indian Desert
To the northwest of the Aravali hills lies the
Great Indian desert. It is a land of undulating
topography dotted with longitudinal dunes
and barchans. This region receives low rainfall
below 150 mm per year; hence, it has arid
climate with low vegetation cover. It is because
of these characteristic features that this is also
known as Marusthali. It is believed that
Figure 2.12 : The Indian Desert
Can you identify the type of sand dunes
shown in this picture?
2015-16(20/01/2015)
18 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Kathiawar coast in Gujarat, Konkan coast in
Maharashtra, Goan coast and Malabar coast
in Karnataka and Kerala respectively. The
western coastal plains are narrow in the
middle and get broader towards north and
south. The rivers flowing through this coastal
plain do not form any delta. The Malabar
coast has got certain distinguishing features
in the form of ‘Kayals’ (backwaters), which
are used for fishing, inland navigation and also
due to its special attraction for tourists. Every
year the famous Nehru Trophy Vallamkali
(boat race) is held in Punnamada Kayal in
Kerala.
As compared to the western coastal plain,
the eastern coastal plain is broader and is an
example of an emergent coast. There are welldeveloped
deltas here, formed by the rivers
flowing eastward in to the Bay of Bengal. These
include the deltas of the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri. Because
of its emergent nature, it has less number of
ports and harbours. The continental shelf
extends up to 500 km into the sea, which
makes it difficult for the development of good
ports and harbours. Name some ports on the
eastern coast.
The Islands
There are two major island groups in India –
one in the Bay of Bengal and the other in the
Arabian Sea. The Bay of Bengal island groups
consist of about 572 islands/islets. These are
situated roughly between 6°N-14°N and
92°E -94°E. The two principal groups of islets
include the Ritchie’s archipelago and the
Labrynth island. The entire group of island is
Figure 2.13 : Coastal Plains
during the Mesozoic era, this region was under
the sea. This can be corroborated by the
evidence available at wood fossils park at Aakal
and marine deposits around Brahmsar, near
Jaisalmer (The approximate age of the woodfossils
is estimated to be 180 million years).
Though the underlying rock structure of the
desert is an extension of the Peninsular
plateau, yet, due to extreme arid conditions,
its surface features have been carved by
physical weathering and wind actions. Some
of the well pronounced desert land features
present here are mushroom rocks, shifting
dunes and oasis (mostly in its southern part).
On the basis of the orientation, the desert can
be divided into two parts: the northern part is
sloping towards Sindh and the southern
towards the Rann of Kachchh. Most of the rivers
in this region are ephemeral. The Luni river
flowing in the southern part of the desert is of
some significance. Low precipitation and high
evaporation makes it a water deficit region.
There are some streams which disappear after
flowing for some distance and present a typical
case of inland drainage by joining a lake or
playa. The lakes and the playas have brackish
water which is the main source of obtaining salt.
The Coastal Plains
You have already read that India has a long
coastline . On the basis of the location and
active geomorphological processes, it can be
broadly divided into two: (i) the western coastal
plains; (ii) the eastern coastal plains.
The western coastal plains are an example
of submerged coastal plain. It is believed that
the city of Dwaraka which was once a part of
the Indian mainland situated along the west
coast is submerged under water. Because of
this submergence it is a narrow belt and
provides natural conditions for the
development of ports and harbours. Kandla,
Mazagaon, JLN port Navha Sheva, Marmagao,
Mangalore, Cochin, etc. are some of the
important natural ports located along the
west coast. Extending from the Gujarat coast
in the north to the Kerala coast in the south,
the western coast may be divided into
following divisions – the Kachchh and
2015-16(20/01/2015)
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY 19
Figure 2.14 : An Island
divided into two broad categories – the
Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the
south. They are separated by a water body
which is called the Ten degree channel. It is
believed that these islands are an elevated
portion of submarine mountains. However,
some smaller islands are volcanic in origin.
Barren island, the only active volcano in India
is also situated in the Nicobar islands.
Some important mountain peaks in
Andaman and Nicobar islands are Saddle
peak (North Andaman – 738 m), Mount
Diavolo (Middle Andaman – 515 m), Mount
Koyob (South Andaman – 460 m) and
Mount Thuiller (Great Nicobar – 642 m).
The coastal line has some coral deposits,
and beautiful beaches. These islands receive
convectional rainfall and have an equatorial
type of vegetation.
The islands of the Arabian sea include
Lakshadweep and Minicoy. These are scattered
between 8°N-12°N and 71°E -74°E longitude.
These islands are located at a distance of
280 km-480 km off the Kerala coast. The
entire island group is built of coral deposits.
There are approximately 36 islands of which
11 are inhabited. Minicoy is the largest island
with an area of 453 sq. km. The entire group
of islands is broadly divided by the Eleventh
degree channel, north of which is the Amini
Island and to the south of the Canannore
Island. The Islands of this archipelago have
storm beaches consisting of unconsolidated
pebbles, shingles, cobbles and boulders on the
eastern seaboard.
On 26 December 2004, the Andaman and Nicobar islands experienced one of the most
devasting natural calamity. Can you name the calamity and identify some other areas
which were adversely affected by the same calamity? What was its major consequence?
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) In which part of Himalayas do we find the Karewa formation?
(a) North-eastern Himalayas (c) Eastern Himalayas
(b) Himachal-Uttarakhand Himalayas (d) Kashmir Himalayas
(ii) In which of the following states is Loktak lake situated?
(a) Kerala (c) Manipur
(b) Uttarakhand (d) Rajasthan
(iii) Which one of the water bodies separates the Andaman from the Nicobar?
(a) 11° Channel (c) 10° Channel
(b) Gulf of Mannar (d) Andaman Sea
(iv) On which of the following hill range is the ‘Dodabeta’ peak situated?
(a) Nilgiri hills (c) Cardamom hills
(b) Anaimalai hills (d) Nallamala hills
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) If a person is to travel to Lakshadweep, from which coastal plain does he
prefer and why?
EXERCISES
2015-16(20/01/2015)
20 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
(ii) Where in India will you find a cold desert? Name some important ranges of
this region.
(iii) Why is the western coastal plain is devoid of any delta?
3. Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) Make a comparison of the island groups of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of
Bengal.
(ii) What are the important geomorphological features found in the river valley
plains?
(iii) If you move from Badrinath to Sunderbans delta along the course of the
river Ganga, what major geomorphological features will you come across?
Project/Activity
(i) Make a list of major Himalayan peaks from the west to the east with the help
of an atlas.
(ii) Identify the major landforms of your state and analyse the major economic
activity practised by the people in each landform.
2015-16(20/01/2015)