MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATERThe ocean water is dynamic. Its physicalcharacteristics like temperature,salinity, density and the externalforces like of the sun, moon and the windsinfluence the movement of ocean water. The
horizontal and vertical motions are common
in ocean water bodies.  The horizontal motion
refers to the ocean currents and waves. Thevertical motion refers to tides. Ocean currents
are the continuous flow of huge amount of
water in a definite direction while the waves
are the horizontal motion of water. Water moves
ahead from one place to another through ocean
currents while the water in the waves does notmove, but the wave trains move ahead. Thevertical motion refers to the rise and fall of water
in the oceans and seas.  Due to attraction of
the sun and the moon, the ocean water is raised
up and falls down twice a day. The upwelling
of cold water from subsurface and the sinking
of surface water are also forms of vertical
motion of ocean water.WAVESWaves are actually the energy, not the wateras such, which moves across the ocean surface.
Water particles only travel in a small circle as awave passes. Wind provides energy to thewaves. Wind causes waves to travel in the ocean
and the energy is released on shorelines. The
motion of the surface water seldom affects the
stagnant deep bottom water of the oceans. Asa wave approaches the beach, it slows down.
This is due to the friction occurring between
the dynamic water and the sea floor. And, when
the depth of water is less than half thewavelength of the wave, the wave breaks. The
largest waves are found in the open oceans.
Waves continue to grow larger as they move
and absorb energy from the wind.Most of the waves are caused by the winddriving against water. When a breeze of two
knots or less blows over calm water, small
ripples form and grow as the wind speed
increases until white caps appear in the
breaking waves. Waves may travel thousands
of km before rolling ashore, breaking and
dissolving as surf.A wave™s size and shape reveal its origin.Steep waves are fairly young ones and are
probably formed by local wind. Slow and
steady waves originate from far away places,
possibly from another hemisphere. The
maximum wave height is determined by thestrength of the wind, i.e. how long it blows and
the area over which it blows in a single direction.Waves travel because wind pushes thewater body in its course while gravity pulls the
crests of the waves downward.  The falling waterpushes the former troughs upward, and theFigure14.1 : Motion of waves and water moleculesCHAPTER
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER121wave moves to a new position (Figure 14.1).The actual motion of the water beneath the
waves is circular. It indicates that things arecarried up and forward as the waveapproaches, and down and back as it passes.Characteristics of WavesWave crest and trough : The highest andlowest points of a wave are called the crest
and trough respectively.Wave height : It is the vertical distancefrom the bottom of a trough to the top ofa crest of a wave.Wave amplitude : It is one-half of the waveheight.Wave period : It is merely the time intervalbetween two successive wave crests ortroughs as they pass a fixed point.Wavelength : It is the horizontal distancebetween two successive crests.Wave speed : It is the rate at which thewave moves through the water, and ismeasured in knots.Wave frequency : It is the number of wavespassing a given point during a one-second time interval.TIDESThe periodical rise and fall of the sea level, onceor twice a day, mainly due to the attraction of
the sun and the moon, is called a tide.Movement of water caused by meteorologicaleffects (winds and atmospheric pressure
changes) are called surges. Surges are notregular like tides. The study of tides is very
complex, spatially and temporally, as it has greatvariations in frequency, magnitude and height.The moon™s gravitational pull to a greatextent and to a lesser extent the sun™s
gravitational pull, are the major causes for the
occurrence of tides. Another factor is centrifugal
force, which is the force that acts to counterbalance the gravity. Together, the gravitationalpull and the centrifugal force are responsible
for creating the two major tidal bulges on the
earth. On the side of the earth facing the moon,
a tidal bulge occurs while on the opposite side
though the gravitational attraction of the moonis less as it is farther away, the centrifugal forcecauses tidal bulge on the other side (Figure
14.2).The ‚tide-generating™ force is the differencebetween these two forces; i.e. the gravitationalattraction of the moon and the centrifugal force.
On the surface of the earth, nearest the moon,
pull or the attractive force of the moon is greater
than the centrifugal force, and so there is a net
force causing a bulge towards the moon. On
the opposite side of the earth, the attractive
force is less, as it is farther away from the moon,
the centrifugal force is dominant. Hence, there
is a net force away from the moon. It creates
the second bulge away from the moon. On the
surface of the earth, the horizontal tide
generating forces are more important than the
vertical forces in generating the tidal bulges.Figure14.2 : Relation between gravitationalforces and tidesThe tidal bulges on wide continentalshelves, have greater height. When tidal bulgeshit the mid-oceanic islands they become low.The shape of bays and estuaries along acoastline can also magnify the intensity of tides.
Funnel-shaped bays greatly change tidal
magnitudes. When the tide is channelled
between islands or into bays and estuariesthey are called tidal currents.
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY122Tides of Bay of Fundy, CanadaThe highest tides in the world occur inthe Bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia, Canada.
The tidal bulge is 15 - 16 m. Becausethere are two high tides and two low tidesevery day (roughly a 24 hour period); then
a tide must come in within about a six
hour period. As a rough estimate, the tide
rises about 240 cm an hour (1,440 cm
divided by 6 hours). If you have walked
down a beach with a steep cliff alongside
(which is common there), make sure you
watch the tides. If you walk for about an
hour and then notice that the tide iscoming in, the water will be over yourhead before you get back to where youstarted!Types of TidesTides vary in their frequency, direction andmovement from place to place and also fromtime to time. Tides may be grouped into various
types based on their frequency of occurrence
in one day or 24 hours or based on their height.Tides based on FrequencySemi-diurnal tide : The most common tidalpattern, featuring two high tides and two lowtides each day. The successive high or low tides
are approximately of the same height.Diurnal tide : There is only one high tide andone low tide during each day. The successivehigh and low tides are approximately of the
same height.Mixed tide : Tides having variations in heightare known as mixed tides. These tides generallyoccur along the west coast of North America
and on many islands of the Pacific Ocean.Tides based on the Sun, Moon and the EarthPositionsThe height of rising water (high tide) variesappreciably depending upon the position ofsun and moon with respect to the earth.
Spring tides and neap tides come under this
category.Spring tides : The position of both the sun andthe moon in relation to the earth has directbearing on tide height. When the sun, the moon
and the earth are in a straight line, the height
of the tide will be higher. These are called spring
tides and they occur twice a month, one on
full moon period and another during new moon
period.Neap tides : Normally, there is a seven dayinterval between the spring tides and neaptides. At this time the sun and moon are at
right angles to each other and the forces of thesun and moon tend to counteract one another.
The Moon™s attraction, though more than twice
as strong as the sun™s, is diminished by the
counteracting force of the sun™s gravitational
pull.Once in a month, when the moon™s orbit isclosest to the earth (perigee), unusually highand low tides occur. During this time the tidalrange is greater than normal.  Two weeks later,when the moon is farthest from earth (apogee),the moon™s gravitational force is limited and
the tidal ranges are less than their average
heights.When the earth is closest to the sun(perihelion), around 3rd January each year,tidal ranges are also much greater, withunusually high and unusually low tides. When
the earth is farthest from the sun (aphelion),around 4th July each year, tidal ranges are
much less than average.The time between the high tide and low tide,when the water level is falling, is called the ebb.The time between the low tide and high tide,
when the tide is rising, is called the flow or flood.Importance of TidesSince tides are caused by the earth-moon-sunpositions which are known accurately, the
tides can be predicted well in advance. This
helps the navigators and fishermen plan their
activities. Tidal flows are of great importance
in navigation. Tidal heights are very important,
especially harbours near rivers and withinestuaries having shallow ‚bars™ at the entrance,
which prevent ships and boats from entering
into the harbour. Tides are also helpful in
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER123desilting the sediments and in removing
polluted water from river estuaries. Tides areused to generate electrical power (in Canada,
France, Russia, and  China). A 3 MW tidal
power project at Durgaduani in Sunderbans
of West Bengal is under way.OCEAN CURRENTSOcean currents are like river flow in oceans.
They represent a regular volume of water in a
definite path and direction. Ocean currents are
influenced by two types of forces namely :
(i) primary forces that initiate the movement of
water; (ii) secondary forces that influence the
currents to flow.The primary forces that influence thecurrents are: (i) heating by solar energy;
(ii) wind; (iii) gravity; (iv) coriolis force. Heating
by solar energy causes the water to expand.
That is why, near the equator the ocean water
is about 8 cm higher in level than in the middle
latitudes. This causes a very slight gradient
and water tends to flow down the slope. Windblowing on the surface of the ocean pushes the
water to move. Friction between the wind and
the water surface affects the movement of the
water body in its course. Gravity tends to pull
the water down the pile and create gradient
variation. The Coriolis force intervenes and
causes the water to move to the right in thenorthern hemisphere and to the left in the
southern hemisphere. These large accumulationsof water and the flow around them are called
Gyres. These produce large circular currentsin all the ocean basins.Differences in water density affect verticalmobility of ocean currents. Water with high

salinity  is denser than water with low salinity
and in the same way cold water is denser than
warm water. Denser water tends to sink, while
relatively lighter water tends to rise. Cold-water
ocean currents occur when the cold water at
the poles sinks and slowly moves towards the
equator. Warm-water currents travel out from
the equator along the surface, flowing towards
the poles to replace the sinking cold water.Types of Ocean CurrentsThe ocean currents may be classified based ontheir depth as surface currents and deep water
currents : (i) surface currents constitute about10 per cent of all the water in the ocean, these
waters are the upper 400 m of the ocean;
(ii) deep water currents make up the other 90per  cent of the ocean water. These waters move
around the ocean basins due to variations in
the density and gravity. Deep waters sink into
the deep ocean basins at high latitudes, where
the temperatures are cold enough to cause the
density to increase.Ocean currents can also be classifiedbased on temperature : as cold currents and
warm currents: (i) cold currents bring coldwater into warm water areas. These currentsare usually found on the west coast of the
continents in the low and middle latitudes
(true in both hemispheres) and on the eastcoast in the higher latitudes in the NorthernHemisphere; (ii) warm currents bring warmwater into cold water areas and are usuallyobserved on the east coast of continents in the
low and middle latitudes (true in both
hemispheres). In the northern hemisphere
they are found on the west coasts of continentsin high latitudes.Major Ocean CurrentsMajor ocean currents are greatly influenced bythe stresses exerted by the prevailing winds and
coriolis force. The oceanic circulation pattern
roughly corresponds to the earth™s atmosphericcirculation pattern. The air circulation over the
oceans in the middle latitudes is mainly
anticyclonic (more pronounced in the southern
hemisphere than in the northern hemisphere).
The oceanic circulation pattern also
corresponds with the same. At higher latitudes,Characteristics of Ocean CurrentsCurrents are referred to by their ﬁdriftﬂ.Usually, the currents are strongest nearthe surface and may attain speeds over
five knots. At depths, currents aregenerally slow with speeds less than 0.5knots. We refer to the speed of a current
as its ﬁdrift.ﬂ Drift is measured in termsof knots. The strength of a current refersto the speed of the current. A fast current
is considered strong. A current is usuallystrongest at the surface and decreasesin strength (speed) with depth. Mostcurrents have speeds less than or equalto 5 knots.
