LANDFORMS AND THEIREVOLUTIONCHAPTERAfter weathering processes have hadtheir actions on the earth materialsmaking up the surface of the earth, thegeomorphic agents like running water, groundwater, wind, glaciers, waves perform erosion.It is already known to you that erosion causes
changes on the surface of the earth. Depositionfollows erosion and because of deposition too,changes occur on the surface of the earth.As this chapter deals with landforms andtheir evolution ‚first™ start with the question,
what is a landform? In simple words, small tomedium tracts or parcels of the earth™s surface
are called landforms.If landform is a small to medium sized
part of the surface of the earth, what is a
landscape?Several related landforms together makeup landscapes, (large tracts of earth™s surface).Each landform has its own physical shape, size,materials and is a result of the action of certaingeomorphic processes and agent(s).  Actions
of most of the geomorphic processes andagents are slow, and hence the results take along time to take shape. Every landform has a
beginning. Landforms once formed maychange in their shape, size and nature slowlyor fast due to continued action of geomorphic
processes and agents.Due to changes in climatic conditions andvertical or horizontal movements of land-
masses, either the intensity of processes or theprocesses themselves might change leading tonew modifications in the landforms. Evolution
here implies stages of transformation of eithera part of the earth™s surface from one landforminto another or transformation of individuallandforms after they are once 
formed.  Thatmeans, each and every landform has a historyof development and changes through time. Alandmass passes through stages of
development somewhat comparable to the
stages of life Š youth, mature and old age.What are the two important aspects ofthe evolution of landforms?The evolutionary history of the continuallychanging surface of the earth is essential to be
understood in order to use it effectively withoutdisturbing its balance and diminishing itspotential for the future. Geomorphology deals
with the reconstruction of the history of the
surface of the earth through a study of its
forms, the materials of which it is made up ofand the processes that shape it.Changes on the surface of the earth owemostly to erosion by various geomorphic
agents. Of course, the process of deposition too,
by covering the land surfaces and filling the
basins, valleys or depressions, brings changesin the surface of the land. Deposition followserosion and the depositional surfaces too are
ultimately subjected to erosion. Running water,
ground-water, glaciers, wind and waves are
powerful erosional and depositional agents
shaping and changing the surface of the earth
aided by weathering and mass wasting
processes. These geomorphic agents acting
over long periods of time produce systematic
changes leading to sequential development of
landforms. Each geomorphic agent produces
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION59its own assemblage of landforms. Not only this,each geomorphic process and agent leave their
distinct imprints on the landforms theyproduce. You know that most of the
geomorphic processes are imperceptiblefunctions and can only be seen and measuredthrough their results. What are the results?
These results are nothing but landforms andtheir characteristics. Hence, a study oflandforms, will reveal to us the process and
agent which has made or has been makingthose landforms.Most of the geomorphic processes areimperceptible. Cite a few processes whichcan be seen and a few which can™t beseen.As the geomorphic agents are capable oferosion and deposition, two sets Š erosionalor destructional and depositional or
constructional Š of landforms are producedby them. Many varieties of landforms developby the action of each of the geomorphic agents
depending upon especially the type andstructure i.e. folds, faults, joints, fractures,hardness and softness, permeability andimpermeability, etc. There are some otherindependent controls like (i) stability of sealevel; (ii) tectonic stability of landmasses; (iii)climate, which influence the evolution of
landforms. Any disturbance in any of thesethree controlling factors can upset thesystematic and sequential stages in the
development and evolution of landforms.In the following pages, under each of thegeomorphic regimes i.e. running water,
groundwater, glaciers, waves, and winds, first abrief discussion is presented as to howlandmasses are reduced in their relief through
erosion and then, development of some of theerosional and depositional landforms is dealt with.RUNNING WATERIn humid regions, which receive heavy rainfallrunning water is considered the most importantof the geomorphic agents in bringing about thedegradation of the land surface. There are twocomponents of running water. One is overlandflow on general land surface as a sheet.  Anotheris linear flow as streams and rivers in valleys.Most of the erosional landforms made by
running water are associated with vigorous and
youthful rivers flowing over steep gradients.With time, stream channels over steep gradients
turn gentler due to continued erosion, and as a
consequence, lose their velocity, facilitating
active deposition. There may be depositional
forms associated with streams flowing over steep
slopes. But these phenomena will be on a small
scale compared to those associated with rivers
flowing over medium to gentle slopes. The
gentler the river channels in gradient or slope,
the greater is the deposition. When the stream
beds turn gentler due to continued erosion,
downward cutting becomes less dominant and
lateral erosion of banks increases and as a
consequence the hills and valleys are reduced
to plains.Is complete reduction of relief of a highland mass possible?Overland flow causes sheet erosion.Depending upon irregularities of the landsurface, the overland flow may concentrate intonarrow to wide paths. Because of the sheerfriction of the column of flowing water, minor
or major quantities of materials from the
surface of the land are removed in the directionof flow and gradually small and narrow rillswill form. These rills will gradually develop into
long and wide gullies; the gullies will further
deepen, widen, lengthen and unite to give rise
to a network of valleys. In the early stages,
down-cutting dominates during which
irregularities such as waterfalls and cascadeswill be removed. In the middle stages, streams
cut their beds slower, and lateral erosion of
valley sides becomes severe. Gradually, the
valley sides are reduced to lower and lower
slopes. The divides between drainage basins
are likewise lowered until they are almost
completely flattened leaving finally, a lowland
of faint relief with some low resistant remnants
called monadnocks standing out here andthere. This type of plain forming as a result ofstream erosion is called a peneplain (an almostplain). The characteristics of each of the stagesof landscapes developing in running waterregimes may be summarised as follows:
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY60Youth
Streams are few during this stage with poorintegration and flow over original slopesshowing shallow V-shaped valleys with nofloodplains or with very narrow floodplains
along trunk streams. Streams divides are broadand flat with marshes, swamp and lakes.Meanders if present develop over these broadupland surfaces. These meanders mayeventually entrench themselves into theuplands. Waterfalls and rapids may exist where
local hard rock bodies are exposed.MatureDuring this stage streams are plenty with goodintegration. The valleys are still V-shaped butdeep; trunk streams are broad enough to havewider floodplains within which streams may
flow in meanders confined within the valley.The flat and broad inter stream areas andswamps and marshes of youth disappear and
the stream divides turn sharp. Waterfalls and
rapids disappear.OldSmaller tributaries during old age are few withgentle gradients. Streams meander freely overvast floodplains showing natural levees, oxbowlakes, etc. Divides are broad and flat with lakes,
swamps and marshes. Most of the landscapeis at or slightly above sea level.EROSIONAL LANDFORMSValleysValleys start as small and narrow rills; the rillswill gradually develop into long and widegullies; the gullies will further deepen, widenand lengthen to give rise to valleys. Dependingupon dimensions and shape, many types ofvalleys like V-shaped valley, gorge, canyon,etc. can be recognised. A gorge is a deep valley
with very steep to straight sides (Figure 7.1) and

a canyon is characterised by steep step-likeside slopes (Figure 7.2) and may be as deep asa gorge. A gorge is almost equal in width at its
top as well as its bottom. In contrast, a canyonis wider at its top than at its bottom. In fact, a

canyon is a variant of gorge. Valley types dependupon the type and structure of rocks in 
whichthey form. For example, canyons commonlyform in horizontal bedded sedimentary rocksand gorges form in hard rocks.Figure 7.1 : The Valley of Kaveri river near Hogenekal,
Dharmapuri district, Tamilnadu in the form of gorge
Figure 7.2 : An entrenched meander loop of river C
oloradoin USA showing step-like side slopes of its valleytypical of a canyon
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION61Potholes and Plunge PoolsOver the rocky beds of hill-streams more or lesscircular depressions called potholes formbecause of stream erosion aided by the abrasionof rock fragments. Once a small and shallow
depression forms, pebbles and boulders getcollected in those depressions and get rotatedby flowing water and consequently thedepressions grow in dimensions. A series of suchdepressions eventually join and the streamvalley gets deepened. At the foot of waterfalls
also, large potholes, quite deep and wide, formbecause of the sheer impact of water androtation of boulders. Such large and deep holesat the base of waterfalls are called plunge pools.These pools also help in the deepening of valleys.Waterfalls are also transitory like any otherlandform and will recede gradually and bringthe floor of the valley above waterfalls to thelevel below.Incised or Entrenched MeandersIn streams that flow rapidly over steepgradients, normally erosion is concentrated onthe bottom of the stream channel. Also, in thecase of steep gradient streams, lateral erosion
on the sides of the valleys is not much whencompared to the streams flowing on low andgentle slopes. Because of active lateral erosion,
streams flowing over gentle slopes, developsinuous or meandering courses. It is commonto find meandering courses over floodplains
and delta plains where stream gradients arevery gentle. But very deep and wide meanderscan also be found cut in hard rocks. Such
meanders are called incised or entrenchedmeanders (Figure 7.2). Meander loops developover original gentle surfaces in the initial stages
of development of streams and the same loopsget entrenched into the rocks normally due toerosion or slow, continued uplift of the land
over which they start.  They widen and deepenover time and can be found as deep gorges andcanyons in hard rock areas. They give an
indication on the status of original landsurfaces over which streams have developed.What are the differences between incisedmeanders and meanders over flood anddelta plains?River TerracesRiver terraces are surfaces marking old valleyfloor or floodplain levels. They may be bedrocksurfaces without any alluvial cover or alluvialterraces consisting of stream deposits. Riverterraces are basically products of erosion as
they result due to vertical erosion by the streaminto its own depositional floodplain. There canbe a number of such terraces at different
heights indicating former river bed levels. Theriver terraces may occur at the same elevationon either side of the rivers in which case theyare called paired terraces (Figure 7.3).Figure 7.3 : Paired and unpaired river terracesWhen a terrace is present only on one side
of the stream and with none on the other sideor one at quite a different elevation on the otherside, the terraces are called unpaired terraces.Unpaired terraces are typical in areas of slowuplift of land or where the water columnchanges are not uniform along both the banks.The terraces may result due to (i) receding waterafter a peak flow; (ii) change in hydrologicalregime due to climatic changes; (iii) tectonicuplift of land; (iv) sea level changes in case ofrivers closer to the sea.DEPOSITIONAL LANDFORMSAlluvial FansAlluvial fans (Figure 7.4) are formed whenstreams flowing from higher levels break intofoot slope plains of low gradient. Normally verycoarse load is carried by streams flowing overmountain slopes. This load becomes too heavyfor the streams to be carried over gentler
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY62gradients and gets dumped and spread as abroad low to high cone shaped deposit called
alluvial fan. Usually, the streams which flowover fans are not confined to their originalchannels for long and shift their position across
the fan forming many channels called
distributaries. Alluvial fans in humid areasshow normally low cones with gentle slope fromas a low cone. Unlike in alluvial fans, thedeposits making up deltas are very well sortedwith clear stratification. The coarsest materials
settle out first and the finer fractions like silts
and clays are carried out into the sea. As the
delta grows, the river distributaries continue
to increase in length (Figure 7.5) and delta
continues to build up into the sea.Floodplains, Natural Levees and Point BarsDeposition develops a floodplain just aserosion makes valleys. Floodplain is a major
landform of river deposition. Large sized
materials are deposited first when streamchannel breaks into a gentle slope. Thus,
normally, fine sized materials like sand, silt and
clay are carried by relatively slow moving
waters in gentler channels usually found in the
plains and deposited over the bed and when
the waters spill over the banks during flooding
above the bed. A river bed made of river
deposits is the active floodplain. The floodplain
above the bank is inactive floodplain.  Inactive
floodplain above the banks basically contain
two types of deposits Š flood deposits andchannel deposits. In plains, channels shiftlaterally and change their courses occasionallyleaving cut-off courses which get filled up
gradually. Such areas over flood plains builtup by abandoned or cut-off channels containcoarse deposits. The flood deposits of spilled
waters carry relatively finer materials like siltand clay. The flood plains in a delta are calleddelta plains.Natural levees and point bars (Figure 7.6)are some of the important landforms found
associated with floodplains. Natural levees arefound along the banks of large rivers. They arelow, linear and parallel ridges of coarse deposits
along the banks of rivers, quite often cut intoindividual mounds. During flooding as thewater spills over the bank, the velocity of thewater comes down and large sized and highspecific gravity materials get dumped in theimmediate vicinity of the bank as ridges. Theyare high nearer the banks and slope gentlyaway from the river. The levee deposits arecoarser than the deposits spread by floodwaters away from the river. When rivers shiftlaterally, a series of natural levees can form.Figure 7.4 : An alluvial fan deposited by a hill streamon the way to Amarnath, Jammu and Kashmirhead to toe and they appear as high cones withsteep slope in arid and semi-arid climates.DeltasDeltas are like alluvial fans but develop at adifferent location. The load carried by the rivers
is dumped and spread into the sea. If this loadis not carried away far into the sea or distributedalong the coast, it spreads and accumulatesFigure 7.5 : A satellite view of part of Krishna riverdelta, Andhra Pradesh
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION63Point bars are also known as meander bars.They are found on the convex side of meandersof large rivers and are sediments deposited ina linear fashion by flowing waters along thebank. They 
are almost uniform in profile and inwidth and contain mixed sizes of sediments. Ifthere more than one ridge, narrow and elongateddepressions are found in between the point bars.
Rivers build a series of them depending uponthe water flow and supply of sediment. As therivers build the point bars on the convex side,the bank on the concave side will erode actively.In what way do natural levees differ frompoint bars?MeandersIn large flood and delta plains, rivers rarely flowin straight courses. Loop-like channel patternscalled meanders develop over flood and deltaplains (Figure 7.7).Figure 7.7 : A satellite scene showing meanderingBurhi Gandak river near Muzaffarpur, Bihar, showinga number of oxbow lakes and cut-offsMeander is not a landform but is only atype of channel pattern. This is because of(i) propensity of water flowing over very gentle
gradients to work laterally on the banks;
(ii) unconsolidated nature of alluvial depositsmaking up the banks with many irregularities
which can be used by water exerting pressure
laterally; (iii) coriolis force acting on the fluid
water deflecting it like it deflects the wind. When
the gradient of the channel becomes extremely
low, water flows leisurely and starts working
laterally. Slight irregularities along the banks
slowly get transformed into a small curvature
in the banks; the curvature deepens due todeposition on the inside of the curve and
erosion along the bank on the outside. If there
is no deposition and no erosion or undercutting,the tendency to meander is reduced. Normally,
in meanders of large rivers, there is active
deposition along the convex bank and
undercutting along the concave bank.Figure 7.8 : Meander growth and cut-off loops andslip-off and undercut banksFigure 7.6 : Natural levee and point bars
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY64The concave bank is known as cut-off bankwhich shows up as a steep scarp and theconvex bank presents a long, gentle profile andis known as slip-off bank (Figure 7.8). Asmeanders grow into deep loops, the same mayget cut-off due to erosion at the inflection points
and are left as ox-bow lakes.Braided ChannelsWhen rivers carry coarse material, there can be
selective deposition of coarser materials causingformation of a central bar which diverts the flow
towards the banks; and this flow increases
lateral erosion on the banks. As the valleywidens, the water column is reduced and moreand more materials get deposited as islands
and lateral bars developing a number ofseparate channels of water flow.  Depositionand lateral erosion of banks are essential for
the formation of braided pattern. Or,alternatively, when discharge is less and loadis more in the valley, channel bars and islandsof sand, gravel and pebbles develop on the floor
of the channel and the water flow is dividedinto multiple threads.  These thread-like streamsof water rejoin and subdivide repeatedly to give
a typical braided pattern (Figure 7.9).Figure 7.9 : Satellite scenes showing braided channelsegments of Gandak (right) and Son (left) riversArrows show the direction of flowFigure 7.10 : Various karst features
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION65GROUNDWATERHere the interest is not on groundwater as aresource. Our focus is on the work of
groundwater in the erosion of landmasses andevolution of landforms. The surface waterpercolates well when the rocks are permeable,
thinly bedded and highly jointed and cracked.After vertically going down to some depth, thewater under the ground flows horizontally
through the bedding planes, joints or throughthe materials themselves. It is this downwardand horizontal movement of water whichcauses the rocks to erode. Physical ormechanical removal of materials by movinggroundwater is insignificant in developinglandforms. That is why, the results of the workof groundwater cannot be seen in all types ofrocks. But in rocks like limestones or dolomites
rich in calcium carbonate, the surface wateras well as groundwater through the chemicalprocess of solution and precipitation
deposition develop varieties of landforms. Thesetwo processes of solution and precipitation areactive in limestones or dolomites occurringeither exclusively or interbedded  with otherrocks. Any limestone or dolomitic region
showing typical landforms produced by theaction of groundwater through the processesof solution and deposition is called Karsttopography after the typical topographydeveloped in limestone rocks of Karst region
in the Balkans adjacent to Adriatic sea.The karst topography is also characterisedby erosional and depositional landforms.EROSIONAL LANDFORMSPools, Sinkholes, Lapies andLimestone PavementsSmall to medium sized round to sub-roundedshallow depressions called swallow holes formon the surface of limestones through solution.
Sinkholes are very common in limestone/karst
areas. A sinkhole is an opening more or lesscircular at the top and funnel-shapped towardsthe bottom with sizes varying in area from a
few sq. m to a hectare and with depth from aless than half a metre to thirty metres or more.Some of these form solely through solutionaction (solution sinks) and others might startas solution forms first and if the bottom of asinkhole forms the roof of a void or cave
underground, it might collapse leaving a large
hole opening into a cave or a void below
(collapse sinks). Quite often, sinkholes are
covered up with soil mantle and appear as
shallow water pools. Anybody stepping over
such pools would go down like it happens in
quicksands in deserts. The term doline issometimes used to refer the collapse sinks.
Solution sinks are more common than collapsesinks. Quite often the surface run-off simply
goes down swallow and sink holes and flow as
underground streams and re-emerge at a
distance downstream through a cave opening.
When sink holes and dolines join together
because of slumping of materials along their
margins or due to roof collapse of caves, long,
narrow to wide trenches called valley sinks orUvalas form. Gradually, most of the surface ofthe limestone is eaten away by these pits and
trenches, leaving it extremely irregular with a
maze of points, grooves and ridges or lapies.Especially, these ridges or lapies form due to
differential solution activity along parallel to
sub-parallel joints. The lapie field may
eventually turn into somewhat smooth
limestone pavements.CavesIn areas where there are alternating beds ofrocks (shales, sandstones, quartzites) with
limestones or dolomites in between or in areas
where limestones are dense, massive and
occurring as thick beds, cave formation is
prominent. Water percolates down either
through the materials or through cracks and
joints and moves horizontally along bedding
planes. It is along these bedding planes  that
the limestone dissolves and long and narrow
to wide gaps called caves result. There can bea maze of caves at different elevations
depending upon the limestone beds and
intervening rocks. Caves normally have an
opening through which cave streams aredischarged. Caves having openings at both theends are called tunnels.Depositional LandformsMany depositional forms develop within thelimestone caves. The chief chemical in limestone
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY66is calcium carbonate which is easily soluble incarbonated water (carbon dioxide absorbedrainwater). This calcium carbonate is depositedwhen the water carrying it in solution
evaporates or loses its carbon dioxide as ittrickles over rough rock surfaces.Stalactites, Stalagmites and PillarsStalactites hang as icicles of differentdiameters. Normally they are broad at theirbases and taper towards the free ends showing
up in a variety of forms. Stalagmites rise upfrom the floor of the caves. In fact, stalagmites
form due to dripping water from the surface or
through the thin pipe, of the stalactite,immediately below it (Figure 7.11).GLACIERSMasses of ice moving as sheets over the land(continental glacier or piedmont glacier if a vast
sheet of ice is spread over the plains at the footof mountains) or as linear flows down theslopes of mountains in broad trough-like
valleys (mountain and valley glaciers) are called
glaciers (Figure 7.12). The movement of glaciers
Figure 7.12 : A glacier in its valleyis slow unlike water flow. The movement couldbe a few centimetres to a few metres a day oreven less or more. Glaciers move basicallybecause of the force of gravity.We have many glaciers in our countrymoving down the slopes and valleys inHimalayas. Higher reaches of Uttaranchal,Himachal Pradesh and Jammu andKashmir, are places to see some of them.
Do you know where one can see river
Bhagirathi is basically fed by meltwatersfrom under the snout (Gaumukh) of theGangotri glacier.  In fact, Alkapuri glacierfeeds waters to Alakananda river. Rivers
Alkananda and Bhagirathi join to makeriver Ganga near Deoprayag.Erosion by glaciers is tremendous becauseof friction caused by sheer weight of the ice.The material plucked from the land by glaciers
(usually large-sized angular blocks andfragments) get dragged along the floors or sidesof the valleys and cause great damage throughabrasion and plucking. Glaciers can cause
significant damage to even un-weathered rocksand can reduce high mountains into low hillsand plains.Figure 7.11 : Stalactites and stalagmites in limestone cavesStalagmites may take the shape of acolumn, a disc, with either a smooth, roundedbulging end or a miniature crater likedepression. The stalagmite and stalactiteseventually fuse to give rise to columns andpillars of different diameters.
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION67As glaciers continue to move, debris getsremoved, divides get lowered and eventuallythe slope is reduced to such an extent thatglaciers will stop moving leaving only a massof low hills and vast outwash plains along with
other depositional features. Figures 7.13 and7.14 show various glacial erosional anddepositional forms described in the text.EROSIONAL LANDFORMSCirqueCirques are the most common of landforms inglaciated mountains.  The cirques quite oftenare found at the heads of glacial valleys. Theaccumulated ice cuts these cirques while
moving down the mountain tops. They aredeep, long and wide troughs or basins withvery steep concave to vertically dropping highwalls at its head as well as sides. A lake of watercan be seen quite often within the cirques afterthe glacier disappears. Such lakes are calledcirque or tarn lakes. There can be two or morecirques one leading into another down below
in a stepped sequence.Horns and Serrated RidgesHorns form through head ward erosion of thecirque walls. If three or more radiating glaciers
cut headward until their cirques meet, high,sharp pointed and steep sided peaks called
horns form. The divides between cirque sidewalls or head walls get narrow because of
progressive erosion and turn into serrated orsaw-toothed ridges sometimes referred to as
arêtes with very sharp crest and a zig-zagoutline.The highest peak in the Alps, Matterhornand the highest peak in the Himalayas,
Everest are in fact horns formed throughheadward erosion of radiating cirques.
Figure 7.13 : Some glacial erosional and depositional forms (adapted and modified from Spencer, 1962)
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY68Glacial Valleys/TroughsGlaciated valleys are trough-like and U-shapedwith broad floors and relatively smooth, andsteep sides. The valleys may contain littered
debris or debris shaped as moraines withswampy appearance. There may be lakes
gouged out of rocky floor or formed by debris
within the valleys. There can be hanging valleysat an elevation on one or both sides of the main
glacial valley. The faces of divides or spurs of
such hanging valleys opening into main glacial
valleys are quite often truncated to give them
an appearance like triangular facets. Very deepglacial troughs filled with sea water and
making up shorelines (in high latitudes) are
called fjords/fiords.What are the basic differences betweenglacial valleys and river valleys?Depositional LandformsThe unassorted coarse and fine debris droppedby the melting glaciers is called glacial till. Mostof the rock fragments in till are angular to sub-angular in form. Streams form by melting ice
at the bottom, sides or lower ends of glaciers.Some amount of rock debris small enough tobe carried by such melt-water streams is
washed down and deposited. Such glacio-
fluvial deposits are called outwash deposits.Unlike till deposits, the outwash deposits are
roughly stratified and assorted. The rock
fragments in outwash deposits are somewhat
rounded at their edges. Figure 7.14 shows a
few depositional landforms commonly found
in glaciated areas.MorainesThey are long ridges of deposits of glacial till.Terminal moraines are long ridges of debrisdeposited at the end (toe) of the glaciers. Lateralmoraines form along the sides parallel to theglacial valleys. The lateral moraines may join a
terminal moraine forming a horse-shoe shaped
ridge (Fig. 7.13). There can be many lateralmoraines on either side in a glacial valley. These
moraines partly or fully owe their origin to glacio-
fluvial waters pushing up materials to the sides
of glaciers. Many valley glaciers retreatingrapidly leave an irregular sheet of till over their
valley floors. Such deposits varying greatly inthickness and in surface topography are called
ground moraines. The moraine in the centre of theFigure  7.14 : A panoramic diagram of glacial landscape with various  depositional landforms(adapted and modified from Spencer, 1962)
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION69glacial valley flanked by lateral moraines iscalled medial moraine. They are imperfectlyformed as compared to lateral moraines.Sometimes medial moraines are indistinguishablefrom ground moraines.EskersWhen glaciers melt in summer, the water flowson the surface of the ice or seeps down along
the margins or even moves through holes inthe ice. These waters accumulate beneath theglacier and flow like streams in a channel
beneath the ice. Such streams flow over theground (not in a valley cut in the ground) withice forming its banks. Very coarse materials like
boulders and blocks along with some minorfractions of rock debris carried into this streamsettle in the valley of ice beneath the glacier
and after the ice melts can be found as asinuous ridge called esker.Outwash PlainsThe plains at the foot of the glacial mountainsor beyond the limits of continental ice sheetsare covered with glacio-fluvial deposits in theform of broad flat alluvial fans which may jointo form outwash plains of gravel, silt, sand andclay.Distinguish between river alluvial plainsand glacial outwash plains.DrumlinsDrumlins are smooth oval shaped ridge-likefeatures composed mainly of glacial till withsome masses of gravel and sand. The long axesof drumlins are parallel to the direction of ice
movement. They may measure up to 1 km inlength and 30 m or so in height. One end ofthe drumlins facing the glacier called the stossend is blunter and steeper than the other endcalled tail. The drumlins form due to dumpingof rock debris beneath heavily loaded icethrough fissures in the glacier. The stoss endgets blunted due to pushing by moving ice.Drumlins give an indication of direction ofglacier movement.What is the difference between till andalluvium?WAVES AND CURRENTSCoastal processes are the most dynamic andhence most destructive. So, don™t you think itis important to know about the coastal
processes and forms?Some of the changes along the coasts takeplace very fast. At one place, there can be
erosion in one season and deposition inanother. Most of the changes along the coastsare accomplished by waves. When waves break,the water is thrown with great force onto theshore, and simultaneously, there is a greatchurning of sediments on the sea bottom.Constant impact of breaking waves drasticallyaffects the coasts.  Storm waves and tsunamiwaves can cause far-reaching changes in ashort period of time than normal breakingwaves. As wave environment changes, theintensity of the force of breaking waves changes.Do you know about the generating forcesbehind waves and currents?  If not, referto the chapter on movements in oceanwaters.Other than the action of waves, the coastallandforms depend upon (i) the configurationof land and sea floor; (ii) whether the coast is
advancing (emerging) seaward or retreating(submerging) landward. Assuming sea level tobe constant, two types of coasts are considered
to explain the concept of evolution of coastallandforms: (i) high, rocky coasts (submergedcoasts); (ii) low, smooth and gently slopingsedimentary coasts (emerged coasts).HIGH ROCKY COASTSAlong the high rocky coasts, the rivers appearto have been drowned with highly irregularcoastline. The coastline appears highlyindented with extension of water into the land
where glacial valleys (fjords) are present. Thehill sides drop off sharply into the water. Shoresdo not show any depositional landformsinitially.  Erosion features dominate.
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY70Along high rocky coasts, waves break withgreat force against the land shaping the hillsides into cliffs. With constant pounding bywaves, the cliffs recede leaving a 
wave-cutplatform in front of the sea cliff. Wavesgradually minimise the irregularities along the

shore.The materials which fall off, and removedfrom the sea cliffs, gradually break into smallerfragments and roll to roundness, will getdeposited in the offshore. After a considerable
period of cliff development and retreat whencoastline turns somewhat smooth, with theaddition of some more material to this deposit
in the offshore, a wave-built terrace woulddevelop in front of wave-cut terrace. As theerosion along the coast takes place a good
supply material becomes available to longshorecurrents and waves to deposit them as beachesalong the shore and as bars (long ridges of sand
and/or shingle parallel to the coast) in thenearshore zone. Bars are submerged featuresand when bars show up above water, they are
called barrier bars. Barrier bar which get keyedup to the headland of a bay is called a spit.When barrier bars and spits form at the mouth
of a bay and block it, a lagoon forms. Thelagoons would gradually get filled up bysediments from the land giving rise to a coastalplain.LOW SEDIMENTARY COASTSAlong low sedimentary coasts the rivers appearto extend their length by building coastalplains and deltas. The coastline appearssmooth with occasional incursions of water in
the form of lagoons and tidal creeks. The landslopes gently into the water. Marshes andswamps may abound along the coasts.
Depositional features dominate.When waves break over a gently slopingsedimentary coast, the bottom sediments get
churned and move readily building bars,barrier bars, spits and lagoons. Lagoonswould eventually turn into a swamp which
would subsequently turn into a coastal plain.The maintenance of these depositional featuresdepends upon the steady supply of materials.Storm and tsunami waves cause drasticchanges irrespective of supply of sediments.
Large rivers which bring lots of sediments builddeltas along low sedimentary coasts.The west coast of our country is a highrocky retreating coast.  Erosional formsdominate in the west coast.  The eastcoast of India is a low sedimentary coast.Depositional forms dominate in the eastcoast.What are the various differences betweena high rocky coast and a low sedimentarycoast in terms of processes andlandforms?EROSIONAL LANDFORMSCliffs, Terraces, Caves and StacksWave-cut cliffs and terraces are two formsusually found where erosion is the dominantshore process. Almost all sea cliffs are steepand may range from a few m to 30 m or evenmore. At the foot of such cliffs there may be aflat or gently sloping platform covered by rockdebris derived from the sea cliff behind. Suchplatforms occurring at elevations above the
average height of waves is called a wave-cutterrace. The lashing of waves against the baseof the cliff and the rock debris that gets
smashed against the cliff along with lashingwaves create hollows and these hollows getwidened and deepened to form sea caves. Theroofs of caves collapse and the sea cliffs recedefurther inland. Retreat of the cliff may leavesome remnants of rock standing isolated as
small islands just off the shore. Such resistantmasses of rock, originally parts of a cliff or hillare called sea stacks. Like all other features,sea stacks are also temporary and eventuallycoastal hills and cliffs will disappear becauseof wave erosion giving rise to narrow coastal
plains, and with onrush of deposits from overthe land behind may get covered up byalluvium or may get covered up by shingle orsand to form a wide beach.
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION71DEPOSITIONAL LANDFORMSBeaches and DunesBeaches are characteristic of shorelines that aredominated by deposition, but may occur aspatches along even the rugged shores. Most of
the sediment making up the beaches comesfrom land carried by the streams and rivers orfrom wave erosion. Beaches are temporaryfeatures. The sandy beach which appears sopermanent may be reduced to a very narrowstrip of coarse pebbles in some other season.
Most of the beaches are made up of sand sizedmaterials. Beaches called shingle beachescontain excessively small pebbles and evencobbles.Just behind the beach, the sands lifted andwinnowed from over the beach surfaces will be
deposited as sand dunes. Sand dunes forminglong ridges parallel to the coastline are verycommon along low sedimentary coasts.Bars, Barriers and SpitsA ridge of sand and shingle formed in the seain the off-shore zone (from the position of lowtide waterline to seaward) lying approximately
parallel to the coast is called an off-shore bar.An off-shore bar which is exposed due tofurther addition of sand is termed a barrierbar. The off-shore bars and barriers commonlyform across the mouth of a river or at theentrance of a bay. Sometimes such barrier barsget keyed up to one end of the bay when they
are called spits (Figure 7.15). Spits may alsodevelop attached to headlands/hills. Thebarriers, bars and spits at the mouth of thebay gradually extend leaving only a small
opening of the bay into the sea and the baywill eventually develop into a lagoon. Thelagoons get filled up gradually by sediment
coming from the land or from the beach itself(aided by wind) and a broad and wide coastalplain may develop replacing a lagoon.Do you know, the coastal off-shore barsoffer the first buffer or defence againststorm or tsunami by absorbing most oftheir destructive force.  Then come thebarriers, beaches, beach dunes andmangroves, if any, to absorb the
destructive force of storm and tsunamiwaves.  So, if we do anything whichdisturbs the ‚sediment budget™ and the
mangroves along the coast, these coastalforms will get eroded away leaving humanhabitations to bear first strike of storm
and tsunami waves.WINDSWind is one of the two dominant agents in hotdeserts. The desert floors get heated up toomuch and too quickly because of being dry
and barren. The heated floors heat up the airdirectly above them and result in upwardmovements in the hot lighter air with
turbulence, and any obstructions in its pathsets up eddies, whirlwinds, updrafts anddowndrafts. Winds also move along the desert
floors with great speed and the obstructionsin their path create turbulence. Of course, thereare storm winds which are very destructive.
Winds cause deflation, abrasion and impact.Deflation includes lifting and removal of dustand smaller particles from the surface of rocks.
In the transportation process sand and silt actas effective tools to abrade the land surface.The impact is simply sheer force of momentum
which occurs when sand is blown into oragainst a rock surface. It is similar to sand-blasting operation. The wind action creates a
number of interesting erosional anddepositional features in the deserts.In fact, many features of deserts owe theirFigure 7.15 : A satellite picture of a part of Godavaririver delta showing a spit
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY72formation to mass wasting and running water
as sheet floods. Though rain is scarce in deserts,
it comes down torrentially in a short period oftime. The desert rocks devoid of vegetation,exposed to mechanical and chemical
weathering processes due to drastic diurnal
temperature changes, decay faster and the
torrential rains help in removing the weatheredmaterials easily. That means, the weathered
debris in deserts is moved by not only wind
but also by rain/sheet wash. The wind moves
fine materials and general mass erosion is
accomplished mainly through sheet floods or
sheet wash. Stream channels in desert areasare broad, smooth and indefinite and flow fora brief time after rains.EROSIONAL LANDFORMSPediments and PediplainsLandscape evolution in deserts is primarilyconcerned with the formation and extension ofpediments. Gently inclined rocky floors close
to the mountains at their foot with or without
a thin cover of debris, are called pediments.Such rocky floors form through the erosion of
mountain front through a combination oflateral erosion by streams and sheet flooding.Erosion starts along the steep margins ofthe landmass or the steep sides of the
tectonically controlled steep incision features
over the landmass. Once, pediments are formedwith a steep wash slope followed by cliff or freeface above it, the steep wash slope and free face
retreat backwards. This method of erosion is
termed as parallel retreat of slopes through
backwasting. So, through parallel retreat of
slopes, the pediments extend backwards at the
expense of mountain front, and gradually, the
mountain gets reduced leaving an inselbergwhich is a remnant of the mountain. That™s how
the high relief in desert areas is reduced to low
featureless plains called pediplains.PlayasPlains are by far the most prominent landformsin the deserts. In basins with mountains and
hills around and along, the drainage is towards
the centre of the basin and due to gradualdeposition of sediment from basin margins, anearly level plain forms at the centre of the
basin. In times of sufficient water, this plain is
covered up by a shallow water body. Such
types of shallow lakes are called as playaswhere water is retained only for short duration
due to evaporation and quite often the playas
contain good deposition of salts. The playa
plain covered up by salts is called alkali flats.Deflation Hollows and CavesWeathered mantle from over the rocks or baresoil, gets blown out by persistent movement
of wind currents in one direction. This process
may create shallow depressions called
deflation hollows. Deflation also createsnumerous small pits or cavities over rocksurfaces. The rock faces suffer impact and
abrasion of wind-borne sand and first shallow
depressions called blow outs are created, and

some of the blow outs become deeper andwider fit to be called caves.Mushroom, Table and Pedestal RocksMany rock-outcrops in the deserts easilysusceptible to wind deflation and abrasion are
worn out quickly leaving some remnants of
resistant rocks polished beautifully in the
shape of mushroom with a slender stalk and a
broad and rounded pear shaped cap above.
Sometimes, the top surface is broad like a table
top and quite often, the remnants stand out
like pedestals.List the erosional features carved out bywind action and action of sheet floods.Depositional LandformsWind is a good sorting agent. Depending uponthe velocity of wind, different sizes of grains are
moved along the floors by rolling or saltation
and carried in suspension and in this process
of transportation itself, the materials get sorted.
When the wind slows or begins to die down,depending upon sizes of grains and their
critical velocities, the grains will begin to settle.
So, in depositional landforms made by wind,
good sorting of grains can be found. Since
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION73wind is there everywhere and wherever thereis good source of sand and with constant wind
directions, depositional features in arid regionscan develop anywhere.Sand DunesDry hot deserts are good places for sand duneformation. Obstacles to initiate dune formationare equally important. There can be a greatvariety of dune forms (Figure 7.16).Crescent shaped dunes called barchanswith the points or wings directed away fromwind direction i.e., downwind, form where thewind direction is constant and moderate and
where the original surface over which sand is
moving is almost uniform. Parabolic dunesform when sandy surfaces are partially covered
with vegetation. That means parabolic dunes
are reversed barchans with wind direction
being the same. Seif is similar to barchan witha small difference. Seif has only one wing orpoint. This happens when there is shift in wind
conditions. The lone wings of seifs can grow
very long and high. Longitudinal dunes form
when supply of sand is poor and wind
direction is constant. They appear as long
ridges of considerable length but low in height.
Transverse dunes are aligned perpendicularto wind direction. These dunes form when the
wind direction is constant and  the source of
sand is an elongated feature at right angles to
the wind direction. They may be very long and
low in height. When sand is plenty, quite often,
the regular shaped dunes coalesce and lose
their individual characteristics.  Most of the
dunes in the deserts shift and a few of them
will get stabilised especially near human
habitations.Figure 7.16 : Various types of sand dunesArrows indicate wind directionEXERCISES1.Multiple choice questions.
  (i)In which of the following stages of landform development, downward cutting
is dominated?(a) Youth stage(c) Early mature stage
(b) Late mature stage(d) Old stage
 (ii)A deep valley characterised by steep step-like side slopes is known as
(a) U-shaped valley(c) Blind valley
(b) Gorge(d) Canyon(iii)In 
which one of the following regions the chemical weathering process ismore dominant than the mechanical process?(a)  Humid region(c) Arid region
(b) Limestone region(d) Glacier region

FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY74(iv)Which one of the following sentences best defines the term ‚Lapies™?
(a)A small to medium sized shallow depression
(b)A landform whose opening is more or less circular at the top and
funnel shaped towards bottom(c)A landform formed due to dripping water from surface
(d)An irregular surface with sharp pinnacles, grooves and ridges
(v)A deep, long and wide trough or basin with very steep concave high walls
at its head as well as in sides is known as:(a) Cirque(c) Lateral Moraine
(b) Glacial valley(d) Esker
2.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)What do incised meanders in rocks and meanders in plains of alluvium
indicate?(ii)Explain the evolution of valley sinks or uvalas.(iii)Underground flow of water is more common than surface run-off inlimestone areas. Why?(iv)Glacial valleys show up many linear depositional forms.  Give their
locations and names.(v)How does wind perform its task in desert areas?  Is it the only agent
responsible for the erosional features in the deserts?3.Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)Running water is by far the most dominating geomorphic agent in shaping
the earth™s surface in humid as well as in arid climates. Explain.(ii)Limestones behave differently in humid and arid climates. Why?  What isthe dominant and almost exclusive geomorphic process in limestone areas
and what are its results?(iii)How do glaciers accomplish the work of reducing high mountains into low
hills and plains?Project WorkIdentify the landforms, materials and processes around your area.
