1Introduction to Maps
Chapter 1Introduction to Maps
You may be familiar with
maps that you have seen inmost of your books of social
sciences representing the
earth or any of its parts.You may also know that the

shape of the earth is geoid(three-dimensional) and a
globe can best represent it

(Fig. 1.1). A map, on the
other hand, is a simplifieddepiction of whole or partof the earth on a piece of
paper. In other words, it is
a two-dimensional form of
the three-dimensional

earth. Hence, a map can bedrawn using a system ofmap projections (see
Chapter 4). As it is impossible to represent all features of the earth™s
surface in their true size and form, a map is drawn at a reduced
scale. Imagine your school campus. If a plan/map of your school is
to be drawn in its actual size, it will be as large as the campus itself.Hence, maps are drawn at a scale and projection so that each point
on the paper corresponds to the actual ground position. Besides,

the representation of different features is also simplified using
symbols, colours and shades. A map is, therefore, defined as
selective, symbolised and generalised representation of whole or a
Figure 1.1 India as it is seen on the globe

2Practical Work in Geography
GlossaryCadastral Map :  A large-scale map drawn at a scale of 1 : 500 to 1 : 4000 to show property
boundaries, designating each parcel of land with a number.
Cardinal Points :
 North (N), South (S), East (E) and West (W).
Cartography :  Art, science and technology of making maps, charts, plans and other modes
of graphical expression as well as their study and use.Generalisation-Map :  A simplified representation of the features on the map, appropriate
to its scale or purpose, without affecting their visual form.
Geoid : An oblate spheroid whose shape resembles the actual shape of the Earth.
Map : A selective, symbolised and generalised representation of the whole or part of the
earth at a reduced scale.
Map series :  A group of maps produced at same scale, style and specifications for a country
or a region.

Projection-Map :  The system of the transformation of the spherical surface onto a plane
surface.
Scale : The ratio between the distances of two points on the map, plan or photograph andthe actual distance between the same two points on the ground.
Sketch Map : A simplified map drawn freehand which fails to preserve the true scale or
orientation.Figure 1.2   Sketch of the Environs of Delhi (Left) and a Map of Delhi  (Right)

3Introduction to Maps
part of the earth's surface on a plane surface at a reduced scale. It may
also be understood that a simple network of lines and polygons withouta scale shall not be called a map. It is only referred to as ﬁthe sketchﬂ
(Fig. 1.2).  In the present chapter, we will study the essential requirements

of maps, their types and the uses.ESSENTIALS OF MAP MAKINGIn view of the variety of maps, we may find it difficult to summarise

what they all have in common. Cartography, being an art and science of
map-making, does include a series of processes that are common to all
the maps. These processes that may also be referred to as essentials of
maps are :
ScaleMap Projection
Map GeneralisationMap DesignMap Construction and  Production
Scale:  We know that all maps are reductions. The first decision that a
map-maker has to take is about the scale of the map. The choice of scaleis of utmost importance. The scale of a map sets limits of information
contents and the degree of reality with which it can be delineated on the
map. For example, figure 1.3 provides a comparison between maps having

different scales and the improvements made thereupon with the change
in scale.Projection:  We also know that maps are a simplified representation
of the three-dimensional surface of the earth on a plane sheet of paper.
The transformation of  all-side-curved-geoidal surface into a plane surface
is another important aspect of the cartographic process. We should know
that such a radical transformation introduces some unavoidable changes

in directions, distances, areas and shapes from the way they appear on
a geoid. A system of transformation of the spherical surface to the plane
surface is called a map projection. Hence, the choice, utilisation and

construction of projections is of prime importance in map-making.

