What do you imagine about the nature
of the earth? Do you imagine it to bea solid ball like cricket ball or ahollow ball with a thick cover of rocks i.e.

lithosphere? Have you ever seen photographsor images of a volcanic eruption on thetelevision screen? Can you recollect the
emergence of hot molten lava, dust, smoke, fire
and magma 
flowing out of the volcanic crater?
The interior  of the earth can be understood only
by indirect evidences as neither any one has nor

any one can reach the interior of the earth.The configuration of the surface of the earth
is largely a product of the processes operatingin the interior of the earth. Exogenic as well as

endogenic processes are constantly shaping
the landscape. A proper understanding of thephysiographic character of a region remainsincomplete if the effects of endogenic processes
are ignored. Human life is largely influenced
by the physiography of the region. Therefore,
it is necessary that one gets acquainted withthe forces that influence landscape
development. To understand why the earth
shakes or how a tsunami wave is generated, itis necessary that we know certain details of theinterior of the earth. In the previous chapter,

you have noted that the earth-forming
materials have been distributed in the form of
layers from the crust to the core. It is interestingto know how scientists have gathered
information about these layers and what are
the characteristics of each of these layers. Thisis exactly what this chapter deals with.INTERIOR OF THE EARTHSOURCES
 OF INFORMATION ABOUT THE INTERIORThe earth™s radius is 6,370 km. No one canreach the centre of the earth and makeobservations or collect samples of the material.
Under such conditions, you may wonder howscientists tell us about the earth™s interior and
the type of materials that exist at such depths.
Most of our knowledge about the interior of
the earth is largely based on estimates and
inferences. Yet, a part of the information is

obtained through direct observations andanalysis of materials.
Direct SourcesThe most easily available solid earth materialis surface rock or the rocks we get from miningareas. Gold mines in South Africa are as deepas 3 - 4 km. Going beyond this depth is not
possible as it is very hot at this depth. Besidesmining, scientists have taken up a number of
projects to penetrate deeper depths to explore
the conditions in the crustal portions. Scientistsworld over are working on two major projects
such as ﬁDeep Ocean Drilling Projectﬂ and
ﬁIntegrated Ocean Drilling Projectﬂ. Thedeepest drill at Kola, in Arctic Ocean, has sofar reached a depth of 12 km. This and many
deep drilling projects have provided largevolume of information through the analysis ofmaterials collected at different depths.Volcanic eruption forms another source of
obtaining direct information. As and when themolten material (magma) is thrown onto the
surface of the earth, during volcanic eruptionit becomes available for laboratory analysis.However, it is difficult to ascertain the depth of

the source of such magma.CHAPTER
