35Map ProjectionsChapter 4Map ProjectionsWhat is map projection? Why are map projections drawn? Whatare the different types of projections? Which projection is mostsuitably used for which area? In this chapter, we will seek the
answers of such essential questions.MAP PROJECTIONMap projection is the method of transferring the graticule of latitudeand longitude on a plane surface. It can also be defined as thetransformation of spherical network of parallels and meridians ona plane surface. As you know that, the earth on which we live in isnot flat. It is geoid in shape like a sphere. A globe is the best modelof the earth. Due to this property of the globe, the shape and sizes
of the continents and oceans are accurately shown on it. It alsoshows the directions and distances very accurately. The globe isdivided into various segments by the lines of latitude and longitude.
The horizontal lines represent the parallels of latitude and thevertical lines represent the meridians of the longitude. The networkof parallels and meridians is called graticule. This network facilitatesdrawing of maps. Drawing of the graticule on a flat surface iscalled projection.But a globe has many limitations. It is expensive. It can neitherbe carried everywhere easily nor can a minor detail be shown on it.Besides, on the globe the meridians are semi-circles and the parallelsare circles. When they are transferred on a plane surface, they
become intersecting straight lines or curved lines.
36Practical Work in Geography
GlossaryMap projection: It is the system of transformation of the sphericalsurface onto a plane surface. It is carried out by an orderly andsystematic representation of the parallels of latitude and the meridiansof longitude of the spherical earth or part of it on a plane surface on aconveniently chosen scale.
Lexodrome or Rhumb Line: It is a straight line drawn on Mercator™sprojection joining any two points having a constant bearing. It is veryuseful in determining the directions during navigation.The Great Circle:  It represents the shortest route between two points,which is often used both in air and ocean navigation.
Homolograhic Projection:  A projection in which the network of latitudesand longitudes is developed in such a way that every graticule on themap is equal in area to the corresponding graticule on the globe. It isalso known as the equal-area projection.
Orthomorphic Projection:  A projection in which the correct shape of agiven area of the earth™s surface is preserved.NEED FOR MAP PROJECTIONThe need for a map projection mainly arises to have a detailed study of aregion, which is not possible to do from a globe. Similarly, it is not easy tocompare two natural regions on a globe. Therefore, drawing accuratelarge-scale maps on a flat paper is required. Now, the problem is how totransfer these lines of latitude and longitude on a flat sheet. If we stick aflat paper over the globe, it will not coincide with it over a large surfacewithout being distorted. If we throw light from the centre of the globe, we
get a distorted picture of the globe in those parts of paper away from theline or point over which it touches the globe. The distortion increaseswith increase in distance from the tangential point. So, tracing all the
properties like shape, size and directions, etc. from a globe is nearlyimpossible because the globe is not a developable surface.In map projection we try to represent a good model of any part of theearth in its true shape and dimension. But distortion in some form or the
other is inevitable. To avoid this distortion, various methods have beendevised and many types of projections are drawn. Due to this reason,
map projection is also defined as the study of different methods whichhave been tried for transferring the lines of graticule from the globe to aflat sheet of paper.

37Map ProjectionsELEMENTS OF MAP PROJECTIONa.Reduced Earth:
  A model of the earth is represented by the helpof a reduced scale on a flat sheet of paper. This model is called the ﬁreduced
earthﬂ. This model should be more or less spheroid having the length ofpolar diameter lesser than equatorial and on this model the network ofgraticule can be transferred.b.Parallels of Latitude: 
These are the circles running round theglobe parallel to the equator and maintaining uniform distance from thepoles. Each parallel lies wholly in its plane which is at right angle to theaxis of the earth. They are not of equal length. They range from a point ateach pole to the circumference of the globe at the equator. They are
demarcated as 0º to 90º North and South latitudes.c.Meridians of Longitude: 
These are semi-circles drawn in north-south direction from one pole to the other, and the two opposite meridians
make a complete circle, i.e. circumference of the globe. Each meridian lieswholly in its plane, but all intersect at right angle along the axis of theglobe. There is no obvious central meridian but for convenience, anarbitrary choice is made, namely the meridian of Greenwich, which is
demarcated as 0° longitudes. It is used as reference longitudes to drawall other longitudesd.Global Property: 
In preparing a map projection the following basicproperties of the global surface are to be preserved by using one or theother methods:(i)Distance between any given points of a region;
(ii)Shape of the region;(iii)Size or area of the region in accuracy;(iv)Direction of any one point of the region bearing to another point.CLASSIFICATION
 OF MAP PROJECTIONSMap Projections may be classified on the following bases:a.Drawing Techniques: 
On the basis of method of construction,projections are generally classified into perspective, non-perspective and
