BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATIONYou have already learnt about thegeomorphic processes particularlyweathering and depth of weatheringmantle in different climatic zones.  See theFigure 6.2 in Chapter 6 in order to recapitulate.
You should know that this weathering mantle
is the basis for the diversity of vegetation and
hence, the biodiversity. The basic cause forsuch weathering variations and resultant
biodiversity is the input of solar energy and
water. No wonder that the areas that are rich
in these inputs are the areas of wide spectrum
of biodiversity.Biodiversity as we have today is the resultof 2.5-3.5 billion years of evolution. Before
the advent of humans, our earthsupported more biodiversity than in anyother period. Since, the emergence of
humans, however, biodiversity has begun
a rapid decline, with one species after
another bearing the brunt of extinctiondue to overuse. The number of species
globally vary from 2 million to 100 million,
with 10 million being the best estimate.
New species are regularly discovered
most of which are yet to be classified (an
estimate states that about 40 per cent offresh water fishes from South Americaare not classified yet). Tropical forests are
very rich in bio-diversity.Biodiversity is a system in constantevolution, from a view point of species, as wellas from view point of an individual organism.The average half-life of a species is estimatedat between one and four million years, and 99
per cent of the species that have ever lived onthe earth are today extinct. Biodiversity is notfound evenly on the earth. It is consistently
richer in the tropics. As one approaches the
polar regions, one finds larger and largerpopulations of fewer and fewer species.Biodiversity itself is a combination of twowords, Bio (life) and diversity (variety). Insimple terms, biodiversity is the number and
variety of organisms found within a specified
geographic region. It refers to the varieties of
plants, animals and micro-organisms, the
genes they contain and the ecosystems they
form. It relates to the variability among living
organisms on the earth, including the
variability within and between the species and
that within and between the ecosystems.
Biodiversity is our living wealth. It is a result
of hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary
history.Biodiversity can be discussed at threelevels : 
(i) Genetic diversity; (ii) Species diversity;(iii) Ecosystem diversity.Genetic DiversityGenes are the basic building blocks of variouslife forms. Genetic biodiversity refers to the
variation of genes within species. Groups of
individual organisms having certain
similarities in their physical characteristics arecalled species. Human beings geneticallybelong to the homo sapiens group and alsodiffer in their characteristics such as height,
colour, physical appearance, etc., considerably.This is due to genetic diversity. This geneticdiversity is essential for a healthy breeding of
population of species.CHAPTER
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY136Species Diversity
This refers to the variety of species. It relates tothe number of species in a defined area. Thediversity of species can be measured through
its richness, abundance and types. Some areas
are more rich in species than others. Areas rich
in species diversity are called hotspots ofdiversity (Figure 16.5).Ecosystem DiversityYou have studied about the ecosystem in theearlier chapter. The broad differences between
ecosystem types and the diversity of habitatsand ecological processes occurring within eachecosystem type constitute the ecosystem
diversity. The ‚boundaries™ of communities
(associations of species) and ecosystems are not
very rigidly defined. Thus, the demarcation of
ecosystem boundaries is difficult and complex.ecosystem evolves and sustains without anyreason.  That means, every organism, besides
extracting its needs, also contributes somethingof useful to other organisms.  Can you think ofthe way we, humans contribute to the
sustenance of ecosystems.  Species capture
and store energy, produce and decompose
organic materials, help to cycle water andnutrients throughout the ecosystem, fix
atmospheric gases and help regulate the
climate. These functions are important for
ecosystem function and human survival. The
more diverse an ecosystem, better are the
chances for the species to survive throughadversities and attacks, and consequently, ismore productive.  Hence, the loss of species
would decrease the ability of the system to
maintain itself.  Just like a species with a high
genetic diversity, an ecosystem with high
biodiversity may have a greater chance of
adapting to environmental change. In other
words, the more the variety of species in an
ecosystem, the more stable the ecosystem is
likely to be.Economic Role of BiodiversityFor all humans, biodiversity is an importantresource in their day-to-day life. One important
part of biodiversity is ‚crop diversity™, which is
also called agro-biodiversity. Biodiversity is
seen as a reservoir of resources to be drawn
upon for the manufacture of food,
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic products. This
concept of biological resources is responsible
for the deterioration of biodiversity. At the same
time, it is also the origin of new conflicts dealing
with rules of division and appropriation of
natural resources. Some of the important
economic commodities that biodiversity
supplies to humankind are: food
crops, livestock, forests, fish, medicinal
resources, etc.Scientific Role of BiodiversityBiodiversity is important because each speciescan give us some clue as to how life evolved
and will continue to evolve. Biodiversity also
helps in understanding how life functions andthe role of each species in sustainingImportance of BiodiversityBiodiversity has contributed in many ways tothe development of human culture and, in
turn, human communities have played a major
role in shaping the diversity of nature at the
genetic, species and ecological levels.
Biodiversity plays the following roles:
ecological, economic  and scientific.Ecological Role of BiodiversitySpecies of many kinds perform some functionor the other in an ecosystem.  Nothing in anFigure 16.1 : Grasslands and sholas in Indira GandhiNational Park, Annamalai, Western Ghats Š an
example of ecosystem diversity
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION137ecosystems of which we are also a species.  Thisfact must be drawn upon every one of us sothat we live and let other species also live theirlives.It is our ethical responsibility to considerthat each and every species along with us have
an intrinsic right to exist.  Hence, it is morally
wrong to voluntarily cause the extinction of anyspecies. The level of biodiversity is a good
indicator of the state of our relationships with
other living species. In fact, the concept of
biodiversity is an integral part of many human
cultures.LOSS OF BIODIVERSITYSince the last few decades, growth in humanpopulation has increased the rate of
consumption of natural resources. It hasaccelerated the loss of species and habitationin different parts of the world. Tropical regions
which occupy only about one-fourth of the
total area of the world, contain about three-
fourth of the world human population. Over-exploitation of resources and deforestation
have become rampant to fulfil the needs of large
population. As these tropical rain forests
contain 50 per cent of the species on the earth,
destruction of natural habitats have proved
disastrous for the entire biosphere.Natural calamities such as earthquakes,floods, volcanic eruptions, forest fires,
droughts, etc. cause damage to the flora and
fauna of the earth, bringing change the
biodiversity of respective affected regions.
Pesticides and other pollutants such as
hydrocarbons and toxic heavy metals destroy
the weak and sensitive species. Species which
are not the natural inhabitants of the local
habitat but are introduced into the system, are
called exotic species. There are manyexamples when a natural biotic community of
the ecosystem suffered extensive damagebecause of the introduction of exotic species.
During the last few decades, some animals like
tigers, elephants, rhinoceros, crocodiles, minks
and birds were hunted mercilessly by poachers
for their horn, tusks, hides, etc. It has resulted
in the rendering of certain types of organisms
as endangered category.The International Union of Conservation ofNature and Natural Resources (IUCN) hasclassified the threatened species of plants and
animals into three categories for the purpose
of their conservation.Endangered SpeciesIt includes those species which are in dangerof extinction. The IUCN publishes informationabout endangered species world-wide as the
Red List of threatened species.Vulnerable SpeciesThis includes the species which are likely tobe in danger of extinction in near future if the
factors threatening to their extinction continue.
Survival of these species is not assured as their
population has reduced greatly.Figure 16.3 : Zenkeria Sebastinei Š a criticallyendangered grass in Agasthiyamalai peak (India)Figure 16.2 : Red Panda Š an endangered species
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY138Rare SpeciesPopulation of these species is very small in theworld; they are confined to limited areas or
thinly scattered over a wider area.conservation strategy has suggested thefollowing steps for biodiversity conservation:(i)Efforts should be made to preserve the
species that are endangered.(ii)Prevention of extinction requires proper
planning and management.(iii)Varieties of food crops, forage plants,timber trees, livestock, animals andtheir wild relatives should be preserved;(iv)Each country should identify habitats
of wild relatives and ensure their
protection.(v)Habitats where species feed, breed, rest
and nurse their young should besafeguarded and protected.(vi)International trade in wild plants and
animals be regulated.To protect, preserve and propagate thevariety of species within natural boundaries,
the Government of India passed the Wild Life(Protection) Act, 1972, under which nationalparks and sanctuaries were established and
biosphere reserves declared.  Details of thesebiosphere reserves are given in the book India:Physical Environment (NCERT, 2006).There are some countries which are situatedin the tropical region; they possess a largenumber of the world™s species diversity.  They
are called mega diversity centres.  There are12 such countries, namely Mexico, Columbia,
Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Democratic Republic ofCongo, 
Madagascar, China, India, Malaysia,Indonesia and Australia in which these centres
are located. In order to concentrate resources
on those areas that are most vulnerable, theInternational Union for the Conservation ofNature and Natural Resources (IUCN) has
identified certain areas as biodiversity hotspots(Figure 16.5).  Hotspots are defined accordingto their vegetation.  Plants are important
because these determine the primaryproductivity of an ecosystem.  Most, but not all,of the hotspots rely on species-rich ecosystems
for food, firewood, cropland, and income fromtimber.  In Madagascar, for example, about 85per cent of the plants and animals are
found nowhere else in the world, Otherhotspots in wealthy countries are facingCONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITYBiodiversity is important for human existence.All forms of life are so closely interlinked that
disturbance in one gives rise to imbalance in
the others. If species of plants and animals
become endangered, they cause degradationin the environment, which may threaten
human being™s own existence.There is an urgent need to educate peopleto adopt environment-friendly practices and
reorient their activities in such a way that our
development is harmonious with other life forms
and is sustainable. There is an increasing
consciousness of the fact that such conservation
with sustainable use is possible only with theinvolvement and cooperation of local
communities and individuals. For this, the
development of institutional structures at local
levels is necessary. The critical problem is not
merely the conservation of species nor the
habitat but the continuation of process of
conservation.The Government of India along with 155other nations have signed the Convention of
Biodiversity at the Earth Summit held at
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 1992. The worldFigure 16.4 : Humbodtia decurrens Bedd Š highly rareendemic tree of Southern Western Ghats (India)
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION139EXERCISES1.Multiple choice questions.
  (i)Conservation of biodiversity is important for :
(a) Animals(c) Plants
(b) Animals and plants(d) All organisms
 (ii)Threatened species are those which :
(a) threaten others
(b) Lion and tiger(c) are abundant in number(d) are suffering from the danger of extinction(iii)National parks and sanctuaries are established for the purpose of :(a) Recreation(c) Pets(b) Hunting(d) ConservationFigure 16.5 : Ecological ‚hotspots™ in the worlddifferent types of pressures. The islands ofHawaii have many unique plants and animalsthat are threatened by introduced species and
land development.
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY140(iv)Biodiversity is richer in :(a) Tropical Regions(c) Temperate Regions

(b) Polar Regions(d) Oceans
(v)In which one of the following countries, the ‚Earth Summit™ was held?
(a) the UK(c) Brazil
(b) Mexico(d) China2.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)What is biodiversity?
(ii)What are the 
different levels of biodiversity?(iii)What do you understand by ‚hotspots™?(iv)Discuss briefly the importance of animals to human kind.(v)What do you understand by ‚exotic species™?
3.Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)What are the roles played by biodiversity in the shaping of nature?
(ii)What are the major factors that are responsible for the loss of biodiversity?What steps are needed to prevent them?Project WorkCollect the names of national parks, sanctuaries and biosphere reserves of thestate where your school is located and show their location on the map of India.
