Have you ever thought about the mostimportant factor which supports trees,

grasses, crops and numerous life-forms over the earth™s surface?  Can one grow

a blade of grass without soil? While some

plants and organisms which are aquatic in
nature can sustain in water, do they not derive

nutrients from soil through water?  You will

realise  that  soil is the most important layer of

the earth™s crust. It is a valuable resource. The

bulk of our food and much of our clothing is
derived from land-based crops that grow in the
soil. The soil on which we depend so much for
our day-to-day needs has evolved over
thousands of years. The various agents of
weathering and gradation have acted upon the
parent rock material to produce a thin layer of
soil.Soil is the mixture of rock debris and
organic materials which develop on the earth™s
surface. The major factors affecting the
formation of soil are relief, parent material,

climate, vegetation and other life-forms and
time. Besides these, human activities also
influence it to a large extent. Components of
the soil are mineral particles, humus, water and
air. The actual amount of each of these depend

upon the type of soil. Some soils are deficient

in one or more of these, while there are some
others that have varied combinations.Have you ever dug a pit in the field of your
school to plant a tree while celebrating Van-

Mahotsava? Was the pit of uniform layer of soil

or did you notice different colours from the top
to the bottom of the pit?
If we dig a pit on land and look at the soil,we find that it consists of three layers whichare called horizons. ‚Horizon A™ is the topmostzone, where organic materials have got
incorporated with the mineral matter,
nutrients and water, which are necessary for
the growth of plants. ‚Horizon B™ is a transition
zone between the ‚horizon A™ and ‚horizon C™,and contains matter derived from below as wellas from above. It has some organic matter in
it, although the mineral matter is noticeablyweathered. ‚Horizon C™ is composed of the looseparent material. This layer is the first stage in
the soil formation process and eventually forms
the above two layers. This arrangement of layersis known as the soil profile. Underneath these
three horizons is the rock which is also knownas the parent rock or the bedrock. Soil, whichis a complex and varied entity has always

drawn the attention of the scientists.  In order
to understand its importance, it is essential to
attempt a scientific study of the soil.
Classification of the soil is an effort to achieve
this objective.CLASSIFICATION OF SOILSIndia has varied relief features, landforms,
climatic realms and vegetation types.  These

have contributed in the development of various

types of soils in India.In ancient times, soils used to be classified
into two main groups Œ 
Urvara and Usara,which were fertile and sterile, respectively. In
the 16th centrury A.D., soils were classified onthe basis of their inherent characteristics andexternal features such as texture, colour, slope
of land and moisture content in the soil. Basedon texture, main soil types were identified asSOILSCHAPTER
69SOILSsandy, clayey, silty and loam, etc. On the basisof colour, they were red, yellow, black, etc.
Since Independence, scientific surveys of
soils have been conducted by various agencies.

Soil Survey of India, established in 1956, made
comprehensive studies of soils in selected areas
like in the Damodar Valley. The National

Bureau of Soil Survey and the Land Use
Planning an Institute under the control of the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
did a lot of studies on Indian soils. In their effort
to study soil and to make it comparable at the
international level, the ICAR has classified the
Indian soils on the basis of their nature and
character as per the United States Departmentof Agriculture (USDA) Soil Taxonomy.
ICAR has classified the soils of India into thefollowing order as per the USDA soil taxonomySl.Order
AreaPercentageNo.(in ThousandHectares)(i)Inceptisols
130372.9039.74(ii)Entisols9213
1.7128.08
(iii)Alfisols4444
8.6813.55
(iv)V
ertisols2796
0.008.52
(v)Aridisols1406
9.004.28
(vi)U
ltisols8250.00
2.51(vi)Mollisols1320.000.40(viii)Others9503.102.92Total100
Source : Soils of India, National Bureau of SoilSurvey and Land Use Planning, PublicationNumber 94On the basis of genesis, colour,
composition and location, the soils of Indiahave been classified into:(i)Alluvial soils
(ii)Black soils(iii)Red and Yellow soils
(iv)Laterite soils(v)Arid soils
(vi)Saline soils(vii)Peaty soils(viii)Forest soils.Alluvial SoilsAlluvial soils are widespread in the northernplains and the river valleys.  These soils cover
about 40 per cent of the total area of thecountry. They are depositional soils,
transported and deposited by rivers and
streams. Through a narrow corridor in
Rajasthan, they extend into the plains of
Gujarat. In the Peninsular region, they are
found in deltas of the east coast and in the river
valleys. The alluvial soils vary in nature from sandy
loam to clay. They are generally rich in potash

but poor in phosphorous. In the Upper and
Middle Ganga plain, two different types of
alluvial soils have developed, viz. Khadar and
Bhangar. Khadar is the new alluvium and isdeposited by floods annually, which enriches
the soil by depositing fine silts. Bhangarrepresents a system of older alluvium,

deposited away from the flood plains. Both the

Khadar and 
Bhangar soils contain calcareous
concretions (Kankars).  These soils are more
loamy and clayey in the lower and middle
Ganga plain and the Brahamaputra valley. The

sand content decreases from the west to east.
The colour of the alluvial soils varies from
the light grey to ash grey. Its shades depend
on the depth of the deposition, the texture of
the materials, and the time taken for attaining

maturity. Alluvial soils are intensively
cultivated.Black SoilBlack soil covers most of the Deccan Plateauwhich includes parts of Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and someparts of Tamil Nadu. In the upper reaches ofthe Godavari and the Krishna, and the northFigure 6.1 : Alluvial Soil
70INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTFigure 6.2 : Major Soil Types of India
71SOILSwestern part of the Deccan Plateau, the black
soil is very deep. These soils are also known as
the ‚Regur Soil™ or  the ‚Black Cotton Soil™. The

black soils are generally clayey, deep and
impermeable. They swell and become sticky
when wet and shrink when dried.  So, during

the dry season, these soil develop wide cracks.
Thus, there occurs a kind of ‚self ploughing™.Because of this character of slow absorption
and loss of moisture, the black soil retains the
moisture for a very long time, which helps the
crops, especially, the rain fed ones, to sustain
even during the dry season.Chemically, the black soils are rich in lime,iron, magnesia and alumina. They also contain

potash. But they lack in phosphorous,
nitrogen and organic matter. The colour of the
soil ranges from deep black to grey.
Red and Yellow Soil
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocksin areas of low rainfall in the eastern and

southern part of the Deccan Plateau. Along the
piedmont zone of the Western Ghat, long stretch
of area is occupied by red loamy soil. Yellow and
red soils are also found in parts of Odisha and

Chattisgarh and in the southern parts of the
middle Ganga plain. The soil develops a reddish
colour due to a wide diffusion of iron in crystalline

and metamorphic rocks. It looks yellow when itoccurs in a hydrated form. The fine-grained redand yellow soils are normally fertile, whereas

coarse-grained soils found in dry upland areasare poor in fertility. They are generally poor in
nitrogen, phosphorous and humus.Laterite SoilLaterite has been derived from the Latin word‚Later™ which means brick. The laterite soils
develop in areas with high temperature and

high rainfall.  These are the result of intense

leaching due to tropical rains. With rain, lime
and silica are leached away, and soils rich in

iron oxide and aluminium compound are left
behind. Humus content of the soil is removed
fast by bacteria that thrives well in high
temperature. These soils are poor in organic
matter, nitrogen, phosphate and calcium,

while iron oxide and potash are in excess.
Hence, laterites are not suitable for cultivation;
however, application of manures and fertilisers

are required for making the soils fertile for
cultivation.Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu, AndhraPradesh and Kerala are more suitable for tree
crops like cashewnut.Laterite soils are widely cut as bricks foruse in house construction. These soils have

mainly developed in the higher areas of the
Peninsular plateau. The laterite soils are
commonly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil

Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and the hilly areas of
Odisha and Assam.Arid SoilsArid soils range from red to brown in colour.
They are generally sandy in structure and
saline in nature. In some areas, the salt content
is so high that common salt is obtained by
evaporating the saline water. Due to the dry

climate, high temperature and accelerated
evaporation, they lack moisture and humus.
Nitrogen is insufficient and the phosphate
Figure 6.3 : Black Soil During Dry SeasonFigure 6.4 : Arid Soil
72INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTcontent is normal. Lower horizons of the soilare occupied by ‚kankar™ layers because of theincreasing calcium content downwards. The

‚Kankar™ layer formation in the bottom horizons
restricts the infiltration of water, and as such

when irrigation is made available, the soil
moisture is readily available for a sustainable
plant growth. Arid soils are characteristically
developed in western Rajasthan, which exhibit
characteristic arid topography. These soils are
poor and contain little humus and organic
matter.
Saline SoilsThey are also known as Usara soils. Saline soilscontain a larger proportion of sodium,

potassium and magnesium, and thus, they are
infertile, and do not support any vegetative
growth. They have more salts, largely because
of dry climate and poor drainage. They occur

in arid and semi-arid regions, and in

waterlogged and swampy areas. Their
structure ranges from sandy to loamy. They
lack in nitrogen and calcium. Saline soils are

more widespread in western Gujarat, deltas of
the eastern coast and in Sunderban areas of

West Bengal. In the Rann of Kuchchh, the

Southwest Monsoon brings salt particles and

deposits there as a crust. Seawater intrusions

in the deltas promote the occurrence of saline
soils. In the areas of intensive cultivation with
excessive use of irrigation, especially in areas
of green revolution, the fertile alluvial soils are
becoming saline. Excessive irrigation with dry
climatic conditions promotes capillary action,
which results in the deposition of salt on the
top layer of the soil. In such areas, especially
in Punjab and Haryana, farmers are advised
to add gypsum to solve the problem of salinity

in the soil.Peaty SoilsThey are found in the areas of heavy rainfalland high humidity, where there is a good
growth of vegetation. Thus, large quantity of
dead organic matter accumulates in these
areas, and this gives a rich humus and organic

content to the soil.  Organic matter in these

soils may go even up to 
40-50 per cent. Thesesoils are normally heavy and black in colour.
At many places, they are alkaline also. It occurs
widely in the northern part of Bihar, southern

part of Uttaranchal and the coastal areas of West

Bengal, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.Forest SoilsAs the name suggests, forest soils are formed inthe forest areas where sufficient rainfall is
available. The soils vary in structure and texture

depending on the mountain environment where
they are formed. They are loamy and silty on
valley sides and coarse-grained in the upperslopes. In the snow-bound areas of theHimalayas, they experience denudation, and
are acidic with low humus content. The soils
found in the lower valleys are fertile.It is evident from the foregoing discussionsthat soils, their texture, quality and nature arevital for the germination and growth of plantand vegetation including crops. Soils are living
systems.  Like any other organism, they too

develop and decay, get degraded, respond to
proper treatment if administered in time. These
have serious repercussions on other
components of the system of which theythemselves are important parts.SOIL DEGRADATIONIn a broad sense, soil degradation can be

defined as the decline in soil fertility, when the
nutritional status declines and depth of the soilgoes down due to erosion and misuse. Soil
degradation is the main factor leading to the
depleting soil resource base in India.  The degree

of soil degradation varies from  place to place

according to the topography, wind velocity and
amount of the rainfall.SOIL EROSIONThe destruction of the soil cover is described as

soil erosion. The soil forming processes and the
erosional processes of running water and wind

go on simultaneously.  But generally, there is a

balance between these two processes.  The rate
of removal of fine particles from the surface isthe same as the rate of addition of particles to

the soil layer.

73SOILSSometimes, such a balance is disturbed bynatural or human factors, leading to a greater
rate of removal of soil. Human activities too are
responsible for soil erosion to a great extent.
As the human population increases, the
demand on the land also increases. Forest and
other natural vegetation is removed for human

settlement, for cultivation, for grazing animals

and for various other needs.Wind and water are powerful agents of soilerosion because of their ability to remove soil
and transport it. Wind erosion is significant in

arid and semi-arid regions.  In regions with

heavy rainfall and steep slopes, erosion by

running water is more significant.  Water

erosion which is more serious and occurs
extensively in 
different parts of India, takes placemainly in the form of sheet and gully erosion.
Sheet erosion takes place on level lands after a
heavy shower and the soil removal is not easily
noticeable.  But it is harmful since it removes the
finer and more fertile top soil. Gully erosion iscommon on steep slopes.  Gullies deepen with
rainfall, cut the agricultural lands into smallfragments and make them unfit for cultivation.A region with a large number of deep gullies or
ravines is called a badland topography. Ravinesare widespread, in the Chambal basin.  Besides
this, they are also found in Tamil Nadu and West

Bengal.  The country is losing about 8,000
hectares of land to  ravines every year. What types
are prone to gully erosion?Soil erosion is a serious problem for  Indian
agriculture and its negative effects are seen in otherspheres also. Eroded materials are carried downto rivers and they lower down their carrying
capacity, and cause frequent floods and damage
to agricultural lands.Deforestation is one of the major causes of soilerosion.  Plants keep soils bound in locks of roots,
and thus, prevent erosion.  They also add humus
to the soil by shedding leaves and twigs. Forests

have been denuded  practically in most parts of
India but their effect on soil erosion are more inhilly parts of the country.A fairly large area of arable land in the irrigatedzones of India is becoming saline because of over-
irrigation.  The salt lodged in the lower profiles of

the soil comes up to the surface and destroys itsfertility. Chemical fertilisers in the absence oforganic manures are also harmful to the soil.
Unless the soil gets enough humus, chemicalsharden it and reduce its fertility in the long run.
This problem is common in all the command
areas of the river valley projects, which were the
first beneficiaries of the Green Revolution.
According to estimates, about half of the total land
of India is under some degree of degradation.Every year, India loses millions of tonnes of
soil and its nutrients to the agents of its
degradation, which adversely affects our nationalproductivity.  So, it is imperative to initiate
immediate steps to reclaim and conserve soils.Soil ConservationIf soil erosion and exhaustion are caused byhumans; by corollary, they can also be
prevented by humans.  Nature has its own laws

of maintaining balance.  Nature offers enough

opportunities for humans to develop their
economy without disturbing the ecological
balance.  Soil conservation is a methodology
to maintain soil fertility, prevent soil erosion
and exhaustion, and improve the degraded
condition of the soil.Soil erosion is essentially aggravated byfaulty practices.  The first step in any rational
solution is to check open cultivable lands on
slopes from farming.  Lands with a slope
gradient of 15 - 25 per cent should not be used
Figure 6.5 : Soil Erosion
74INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTfor cultivation. If at all the land is to be usedfor agriculture, terraces should carefully be
made. Over-grazing and shifting cultivation  in
many parts of India have affected the natural
cover of land and given rise to extensive erosion.
It should be regulated and controlled byeducating villagers about the consequences.
Contour bunding, Contour terracing,regulated forestry, controlled grazing, covercropping, mixed farming and crop rotation are

some of the remedial measures which are oftenadopted to reduce soil erosion.Efforts should be made to prevent gully
erosion and control their formation. Finger
gullies can be eliminated by terracing.  In
bigger gullies, the erosive velocity of water maybe reduced by constructing a series of checkdams. Special attention should be made tocontrol headward extension of gullies.  This can
be done by gully plugging, terracing or by
planting cover vegetation.In arid and semi-arid areas, efforts shouldbe made to protect cultivable lands from
encroachment by sand dunes throughdeveloping shelter belts of trees andagro-forestry.  Lands not suitable for

cultivation should be converted into pasturesfor grazing. Experiments have been made tostabilise sand dunes in western Rajasthan by

the Central  Arid Zone Research Institute
(CAZRI).The Central Soil Conservation Board, set up
by the Government of India, has prepared anumber of plans for soil conservation in differentparts of the country. These plans are based on
the climatic conditions, configuration of landand the social behaviour of people. Even these
plans are fragmental in nature.  Integrated land

use planning, therefore, seems to be the best
technique for proper soil conservation.  Lands
should be classified according to their

capability; land use maps should be prepared
and lands should be put to right uses.  The final
responsibility for achieving the conservation of

land will rest on the people who operate on itand receive the benefits.Figure 6.6 : Terrace Farming1.Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i)Which one of the following is the most widespread and most productive
category of soil?(a)Alluvial Soil(c)Black Soil

(b)Laterite Soil(d)
Forest Soil(ii)‚
Regur Soil™ is another name for the.
(a)Saline Soil(c)Black Soil
(b)Arid Soil(d)
Laterite Soil(iii)Which one of the following is the main reason for the loss of the top soilin India?(a)Wind erosion(c)
Excessive leaching(b)Water erosion
(d)None of these
EXERCISES
75SOILS(iv)Arable land in the irrigated zones of India is turning saline due to which
of the following reasons?
(a)Addition of gypsum(c)
Over irrigation(b)Over grazing
(d)Use of fertilisers
2.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)What is soil?
(ii)What are the main factors responsible for the formation of soil?(iii)Mention the three horizons of a soil profile.(iv)What is soil degradation?(v)What is the difference between 
Khadar and 
Bhangar?3.Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i)What are black soils? Describe their formation and characteristics.
(ii)What is soil conservation? Suggest some measures to conserve soil.(iii)How do you know that a particular type of soil is fertile or not? Differentiatebetween naturally determined fertility and culturally induced fertility.
Project/Activity1.Collect various samples of soil and prepare a report on the type(s) of soils
found in your region.2.On an outline map of India, mark the areas coverd by the following soil
categories.(i)Red soil
(ii)Laterite soil(iii)Alluvial soil.

