CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND SOIL
This unit deals with
• Weather and climate – spatial and temporal distribution of temperature,
pressure, winds and rainfall; Indian monsoons: mechanism, onset and
variability – spatial and temporal; climatic types
• Natural vegetation – forest types and distribution; wild life
conservation; biosphere reserves
• Soils – major types and their distribution, soil degradation and
conservation
UNIT
III
We drink more water during summers.
Your uniform during the summer is
different from the winters. Why do
you wear lighter clothes during summers and
heavy woollen clothes during winters in north
India? In southern India, woollen clothes are
not required. In northeastern states, winters
are mild except in the hills. There are variations
in weather conditions during different seasons.
These changes occur due to the changes in the
elements of weather (temperature, pressure,
wind direction and velocity, humidity and
precipitation, etc.).
Weather is the momentary state of the
atmosphere while climate refers to the
average of the weather conditions over a
longer period of time. Weather changes
quickly, may be within a day or week but
climate changes imperceptively and may
be noted after 50 years or even more.
You have already studied about the
monsoon in your earlier classes. You are also
aware of the meaning of the word, “monsoon”.
Monsoon connotes the climate associated with
seasonal reversal in the direction of winds.
India has hot monsoonal climate which is the
prevalent climate in south and southeast Asia.
UNITY AND DIVERSITY IN THE MONSOON CLIMATE
The monsoon regime emphasises the unity of
India with the rest of southeast Asian region.
This view of broad unity of the monsoon type
of climate should not, however, lead one to
ignore its regional variations which differentiate
the weather and climate of different regions of
India. For example, the climate of Kerala and
Tamil Nadu in the south are so different from
that of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in the north,
and yet all of these have a monsoon type of
climate. The climate of India has many regional
variations expressed in the pattern of winds,
temperature and rainfall, rhythm of seasons
and the degree of wetness or dryness. These
regional diversities may be described as
sub-types of monsoon climate. Let us take a
closer look at these regional variations in
temperature, winds and rainfall.
While in the summer the mercury
occasionally touches 55°C in the western
Rajasthan, it drops down to as low as minus
45°C in winter around Leh. Churu in Rajasthan
may record a temperature of 50°C or more on a
June day while the mercury hardly touches
19°C in Tawang (Arunachal Pradesh) on the
same day. On a December night, temperature
in Drass (Jammu and Kashmir) may drop down
to minus 45°C while Thiruvananthapuram or
Chennai on the same night records 20°C or
22°C. These examples confirm that there are
seasonal variations in temperature from place
to place and from region to region in India. Not
only this, if we take only a single place and
record the temperature for just one day,
variations are no less striking. In Kerala and in
the Andaman Islands, the difference between
day and night temperatures may be hardly
seven or eight degree Celsius. But in the Thar
desert, if the day temperature is around 50°C,
at night, it may drop down considerably upto
15°-20°C.
CLIMATE
C H A P T E R
34 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Now, let us see the regional variations in
precipitation. While snowfall occurs in the
Himalayas, it only rains over the rest of the
country. Similarly, variations are noticeable not
only in the type of precipitation but also in its
amount. While Cherrapunji and Mawsynram
in the Khasi Hills of Meghalaya receive rainfall
over 1,080 cm in a year, Jaisalmer in Rajasthan
rarely gets more than 9 cm of rainfall during
the same period.
Tura situated in the Garo Hills of
Meghalaya may receive an amount of rainfall
in a single day which is equal to 10 years of
rainfall at Jaisalmer. While the annual
precipitation is less than 10 cm in the northwest
Himalayas and the western deserts, it
exceeds 400 cm in Meghalaya.
The Ganga delta and the coastal plains of
Orissa are hit by strong rain-bearing storms
almost every third or fifth day in July and
August while the Coromandal coast, a
thousand km to the south, goes generally dry
during these months. Most parts of the country
get rainfall during June-September, but on the
coastal areas of Tamil Nadu, it rains in the
beginning of the winter season.
In spite of these differences and variations,
the climate of India is monsoonal in rhythm
and character.
FACTORS DETERMINING THE CLIMATE OF INDIA
India’s climate is controlled by a number of
factors which can be broadly divided into two
groups — factors related to location and relief,
and factors related to air pressure and winds.
Factors related to Location and Relief
Latitude : You already know the latitudinal and
longitudinal extent of the land of India. You
also know that the Tropic of Cancer passes
through the central part of India in east-west
direction. Thus, northern part of the India lies
in sub-tropical and temperate zone and the
part lying south of the Tropic of Cancer falls in
the tropical zone. The tropical zone being
nearer to the equator, experiences high
temperatures throughout the year with small
daily and annual range. Area north of the
Tropic of Cancer being away from the equator,
experiences extreme climate with high daily
and annual range of temperature.
The Himalayan Mountains : The lofty Himalayas
in the north along with its extensions act as an
effective climatic divide. The towering mountain
chain provides an invincible shield to protect
the subcontinent from the cold northern winds.
These cold and chilly winds originate near the
Arctic circle and blow across central and eastern
Asia. The Himalayas also trap the monsoon
winds, forcing them to shed their moisture
within the subcontinent.
Distribution of Land and Water : India is
flanked by the Indian Ocean on three sides in
the south and girdled by a high and
continuous mountain-wall in the north. As
compared to the landmass, water heats up or
cools down slowly. This differential heating of
land and sea creates different air pressure
zones in different seasons in and around the
Indian subcontinent. Difference in air pressure
causes reversal in the direction of monsoon
winds.
Distance from the Sea : With a long coastline,
large coastal areas have an equable climate.
Areas in the interior of India are far away from
the moderating influence of the sea. Such
areas have extremes of climate. That is why,
the people of Mumbai and the Konkan coast
have hardly any idea of extremes of
temperature and the seasonal rhythm of
weather. On the other hand, the seasonal
contrasts in weather at places in the interior of
the country such as Delhi, Kanpur and
Amritsar affect the entire sphere of life.
Altitude : Temperature decreases with height.
Due to thin air, places in the mountains are
cooler than places on the plains. For example,
Agra and Darjiling are located on the same
latitude, but temperature of January in Agra
is 16°C whereas it is only 4°C in Darjiling.
Relief : The physiography or relief of India also
affects the temperature, air pressure, direction
and speed of wind and the amount and
distribution of rainfall. The windward sides of
Western Ghats and Assam receive high rainfall
CLIMATE 35
during June-September whereas the southern
plateau remains dry due to its leeward
situation along the Western Ghats.
Factors Related to Air Pressure and Wind
To understand the differences in local climates
of India, we need to understand the
mechanism of the following three factors:
(i) Distribution of air pressure and winds
on the surface of the earth.
(ii) Upper air circulation caused by factors
controlling global weather and the inflow
of different air masses and jet streams.
(iii) Inflow of western cyclones generally
known as disturbances during the winter
season and tropical depressions during
the south-west monsoon period into
India, creating weather conditions
favourable to rainfall.
The mechanism of these three factors can
be understood with reference to winter and
summer seasons of the year separately.
Mechanism of Weather in the Winter Season
Surface Pressure and Winds : In winter
months, the weather conditions over India are
generally influenced by the distribution of
pressure in Central and Western Asia. A high
pressure centre in the region lying to the north
of the Himalayas develops during winter. This
centre of high pressure gives rise to the flow of
air at the low level from the north towards the
Indian subcontinent, south of the mountain
range. The surface winds blowing out of the high
pressure centre over Central Asia reach India
in the form of a dry continental air mass. These
continental winds come in contact with trade
winds over northwestern India. The position of
this contact zone is not, however, stable.
Occasionally, it may shift its position as far east
as the middle Ganga valley with the result that
the whole of the northwestern and northern
India up to the middle Ganga valley comes
under the influence of dry northwestern winds.
Jet Stream and Upper Air Circulation : The
pattern of air circulation discussed above is
witnessed only at the lower level of the
atmosphere near the surface of the earth. Higher
up in the lower troposphere, about three km
above the surface of the earth, a different pattern
of air circulation is observed. The variations in
the atmospheric pressure closer to the surface
of the earth have no role to play in the making of
upper air circulation. All of Western and Central
Asia remains under the influence of westerly
winds along the altitude of 9-13 km from west
to east. These winds blow across the Asian
continent at latitudes north of the Himalayas
roughly parallel to the Tibetan highlands
(Figure 4.1). These are known as jet streams.
Tibetan highlands act as a barrier in the path of
these jet streams. As a result, jet streams get
bifurcated. One of its branches blows to the north
of the Tibetan highlands, while the southern
branch blows in an eastward direction, south of
the Himalayas. It has its mean position at 25°N
in February at 200-300 mb level. It is believed
that this southern branch of the jet stream
exercises an important influence on the winter
weather in India.
Western Cyclonic Disturbance and Tropical
Cyclones : The western cyclonic disturbances
which enter the Indian subcontinent from the west
and the northwest during the winter months,
originate over the Mediterranean Sea and are
Figure 4.1 : Direction of Winds in India in
Winter at the Height of 9-13 km
36 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
brought into India by the westerly jet stream. An
increase in the prevailing night temperature
generally indicates an advance in the arrival of these
cyclones disturbances.
Tropical cyclones originate over the Bay of
Bengal and the Indian ocean. These tropical
cyclones have very high wind velocity and heavy
rainfall and hit the Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh
and Orissa coast. Most of these cyclones are very
destructive due to high wind velocity and torrential
rain that accompanies it. Have you seen their
movement in the weather report in the television?
Mechanism of Weather in the Summer Season
Surface Pressure and Winds : As the summer
sets in and the sun shifts northwards, the wind
circulation over the subcontinent undergoes
a complete reversal at both, the lower as well
as the upper levels. By the middle of July, the
low pressure belt nearer the surface [termed
as Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)]
shifts northwards, roughly parallel to the
Himalayas between 20° N and 25° N. By this
time, the westerly jet stream withdraws from
the Indian region. In fact, meteorologists have
found an interrelationship between the
northward shift of the equatorial trough (ITCZ)
and the withdrawal of the westerly jet stream
from over the North Indian Plain. It is generally
believed that there is a cause and effect
relationship between the two. The ITCZ being
a zone of low pressure, attracts inflow of winds
from different directions. The maritime tropical
airmass (mT) from the southern hemisphere,
after crossing the equator, rushes to the low
pressure area in the general southwesterly
direction. It is this moist air current which is
popularly known as the southwest monsoon.
Jet Streams and Upper Air Circulation : The
pattern of pressure and winds as mentioned
above is formed only at the level of the
troposphere. An easterly jet stream flows over
Figure 4.2 : Summer Monsoon Winds : Surface Circulation
CLIMATE 37
the southern part of the Peninsula in June, and
has a maximum speed of 90 km per hour
(Figure 4.3). In August, it is confined to 15oN
latitude, and in September up to 22o N latitudes.
The easterlies normally do not extend to the north
of 30o N latitude in the upper atmosphere.
Easterly Jet Stream and Tropical Cyclones : The
easterly jet stream steers the tropical
depressions into India. These depressions play
a significant role in the distribution of monsoon
rainfall over the Indian subcontinent. The
tracks of these depressions are the areas of
highest rainfall in India. The frequency at which
these depressions visit India, their direction
and intensity, all go a long way in determining
the rainfall pattern during the southwest
monsoon period.
Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a low pressure zone located at the equator
where trade winds converge, and so, it is a zone where air tends to ascend. In July, the
ITCZ is located around 20°N-25°N latitudes (over the Gangetic plain), sometimes called
the monsoon trough. This monsoon trough encourages the development of thermal low
over north and northwest India. Due to the shift of ITCZ, the trade winds of the southern
hemisphere cross the equator between 40° and 60°E longitudes and start blowing from
southwest to northeast due to the Coriolis force. It becomes southwest monsoon. In winter,
the ITCZ moves southward, and so the reversal of winds from northeast to south and
southwest, takes place. They are called northeast monsoons.
THE NATURE OF INDIAN MONSOON
Monsoon is a familiar though a little known
climatic phenomenon. Despite the observations
spread over centuries, the monsoon continues
to puzzle the scientists. Many attempts have
been made to discover the exact nature and
causation of monsoon, but so far, no single
theory has been able to explain the monsoon
fully. A real breakthrough has come recently
when it was studied at the global rather than
at regional level.
Systematic studies of the causes of rainfall
in the South Asian region help to understand
the causes and salient features of the monsoon,
particularly some of its important aspects,
such as:
(i) The onset of the monsoon.
(ii) Rain-bearing systems (e.g. tropical
cyclones) and the relationship between
their frequency and distribution of
monsoon rainfall.
(iii) Break in the monsoon.
Onset of the Monsoon
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it
was believed that the differential heating of
land and sea during the summer months is
the mechanism which sets the stage for the
monsoon winds to drift towards the
subcontinent. During April and May when the
sun shines vertically over the Tropic of Cancer,
the large landmass in the north of Indian ocean
gets intensely heated. This causes the
formation of an intense low pressure in the
northwestern part of the subcontinent. Since
the pressure in the Indian Ocean in the south
of the landmass is high as water gets heated
Figure 4.3 : The Direction of Winds at 13 km
Altitude in Summer Season
38 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The shift in the position of the ITCZ is also
related to the phenomenon of the withdrawal
of the westerly jet stream from its position over
the north Indian plain, south of the Himalayas.
The easterly jet stream sets in along 15°N
latitude only after the western jet stream has
withdrawn itself from the region. This easterly
jet stream is held responsible for the burst of
the monsoon in India.
Entry of Monsoon into India : The southwest
monsoon sets in over the Kerala coast by 1st
June and moves swiftly to reach Mumbai and
Kolkata between 10th and 13th June. By mid-
July, southwest monsoon engulfs the entire
subcontinent (Figure 4.5)
Rain-bearing Systems and Rainfall
Distribution
There seem to be two rain-bearing systems in
India. First originate in the Bay of Bengal
causing rainfall over the plains of north India.
Second is the Arabian Sea current of the southwest
monsoon which brings rain to the west
coast of India. Much of the rainfall along the
Western Ghats is orographic as the moist air is
obstructed and forced to rise along the Ghats.
The intensity of rainfall over the west coast of
India is, however, related to two factors:
(i) The offshore meteorological conditions.
(ii) The position of the equatorial jet stream
along the eastern coast of Africa.
EI-Nino and the Indian Monsoon
EI-Nino is a complex weather system that appears once every three to seven years, bringing
drought, floods and other weather extremes to different parts of the world.
The system involves oceanic and atmospheric phenomena with the appearance of warm
currents off the coast of Peru in the Eastern Pacific and affects weather in many places including
India. EI-Nino is merely an extension of the warm equatorial current which gets replaced temporarily
by cold Peruvian current or Humbolt current (locate these currents in your atlas). This current
increases the temperature of water on the Peruvian coast by 10°C. This results in:
(i) the distortion of equatorial atmospheric circulation;
(ii) irregularities in the evaporation of sea water;
(iii) reduction in the amount of planktons which further reduces the number of fish in the sea.
The word EI-Nino means ‘Child Christ’ because this current appears around Christmas
in December. December is a summer month in Peru (Southern Hemisphere).
EI-Nino is used in India for forecasting long range monsoon rainfall. In 1990-91, there
was a wild EI-Nino event and the onset of southwest monsoon was delayed over most parts of
the country ranging from five to twelve days.
Figure 4.4 : Onset of Monsoon
slowly, the low pressure cell attracts the
southeast trades across the Equator. These
conditions help in the northward shift in the
position of the ITCZ. The southwest monsoon
may thus, be seen as a continuation of the
southeast trades deflected towards the Indian
subcontinent after crossing the Equator. These
winds cross the Equator between 40°E and
60°E longitudes.
CLIMATE 39
Figure 4.5 : India : Normal Dates of Onset of the Southwest Monsoon
40 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The frequency of the tropical depressions
originating from the Bay of Bengal varies from
year to year. Their paths over India are mainly
determined by the position of ITCZ which is
generally termed as the monsoon trough. As
the axis of the monsoon trough oscillates, there
are fluctuations in the track and direction of
these depressions, and the intensity and the
amount of rainfall vary from year to year. The
rain which comes in spells, displays a declining
trend from west to east over the west coast, and
from the southeast towards the northwest over
the North Indian Plain and the northern part
of the Peninsula.
Break in the Monsoon
During the south-west monsoon period after
having rains for a few days, if rain fails to occur
for one or more weeks, it is known as break in
the monsoon. These dry spells are quite
common during the rainy season. These
breaks in the different regions are due to
different reasons:
(i) In northern India rains are likely to fail if
the rain-bearing storms are not very
frequent along the monsoon trough or
the ITCZ over this region.
(ii) Over the west coast the dry spells are
associated with days when winds blow
parallel to the coast.
THE RHYTHM OF SEASONS
The climatic conditions of India can best be
described in terms of an annual cycle of
seasons. The meteorologists recognise the
following four seasons :
(i) the cold weather season
(ii) the hot weather season
(iii) the southwest monsoon season
(iv) the retreating monsoon season.
The Cold Weather Season
Temperature : Usually, the cold weather
season sets in by mid-November in northern
India. December and January are the coldest
months in the northern plain. The mean daily
temperature remains below 21°C over most
parts of northern India. The night temperature
may be quite low, sometimes going below
freezing point in Punjab and Rajasthan.
There are three main reasons for the excessive
cold in north India during this season :
(i) States like Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan being far away from the
moderating influence of sea experience
continental climate.
(ii) The snowfall in the nearby Himalayan
ranges creates cold wave situation; and
(iii) Around February, the cold winds coming
from the Caspian Sea and Turkmenistan
bring cold wave along with frost and fog
over the northwestern parts of India.
Understanding the Monsoon
Attempts have been made to
understand the nature and
mechanism of the monsoon on the
basis of data collected on land, oceans
and in the upper atmosphere. The
intensity of southwest monsoon winds
of southern oscillation can be
measured, among others, by measuring
the difference in pressure between
Tahiti (roughly 20°S and 140°W) in
French Polynesia in East Pacific and
port Darwin (12°30'S and 131°E) in
northern Australia. Indian Meteorological
Department (IMD) can forecast the
possible behaviour of monsoons on the
basis of 16 indicators.
The Peninsular region of India, however,
does not have any well-defined cold weather
season. There is hardly any seasonal change
in the distribution pattern of the temperature
in coastal areas because of moderating
influence of the sea and the proximity to
equator. For example, the mean maximum
temperature for January at Thiruvanantapuram
is as high as 31°C, and for June, it is 29.5°C.
Temperatures at the hills of Western Ghats
remain comparatively low (Figure 4.6).
Pressure and Winds : By the end of December
(22nd December), the sun shines vertically
over the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern
hemisphere. The weather in this season is
characterised by feeble high pressure
conditions over the northern plain. In south
CLIMATE 41
Figure 4.6 : India : Mean Monthly Temperatures of the Day in January
42 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
India, the air pressure is slightly lower. The
isobars of 1019 mb and 1013 mb pass
through northwest India and far south,
respectively (Figure 4.7).
As a result, winds start blowing from
northwestern high pressure zone to the low air
pressure zone over the Indian Ocean in the
south.
Due to low pressure gradient, the light
winds with a low velocity of about 3-5 km per
hour begin to blow outwards. By and large,
the topography of the region influences the
wind direction. They are westerly or
northwesterly down the Ganga Valley. They
become northerly in the Ganga-Brahmaputra
delta. Free from the influence of topography,
they are clearly northeasterly over the Bay of
Bengal.
During the winters, the weather in India
is pleasant. The pleasant weather conditions,
however, at intervals, get disturbed by shallow
cyclonic depressions originating over the east
Mediterranean Sea and travelling eastwards
across West Asia, Iran, Afghanistan and
Pakistan before they reach the northwestern
parts of India. On their way, the moisture
content gets augmented from the Caspian Sea
in the north and the Persian Gulf in the south.
What is the role of Westerly Jet Streams in
steering these depressions in India?
Rainfall : Winter monsoons do not cause
rainfall as they move from land to the sea. It is
because firstly, they have little humidity; and
secondly, due to anti cyclonic circulation on
land, the possibility of rainfall from them
reduces. So, most parts of India do not have
rainfall in the winter season. However, there are
some exceptions to it:
(i) In northwestern India, some weak
temperate cyclones from the
Mediterranean sea cause rainfall in
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and western
Uttar Pradesh. Although the amount
is meagre, it is highly beneficial for
rabi crops. The precipitation is in the
form of snowfall in the lower
Himalayas. It is this snow that
sustains the flow of water in the
Himalayan rivers during the summer
months. The precipitation goes on
decreasing from west to east in the
plains and from north to south in the
mountains. The average winter rainfall
in Delhi is around 53 mm. In Punjab
and Bihar, rainfall remains between 25
mm and 18 mm respectively.
(ii) Central parts of India and northern
parts of southern Peninsula also get
winter rainfall occasionally.
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh and Assam in the
northeastern parts of India also have
rains between 25 mm and 50 mm
during these winter months.
(iv) During October and November,
northeast monsoon while crossing over
the Bay of Bengal, picks up moisture
and causes torrential rainfall over the
Tamil Nadu coast, southern Andhra
Pradesh, southeast Karnataka and
southeast Kerala.
The Hot Weather Season
Temperature: With the apparent northward
movement of the sun towards the Tropic of
Cancer in March, temperatures start rising
in north India. April, May and June are the
months of summer in north India. In most
parts of India, temperatures recorded are
between 30°-32°C. In March, the highest day
temperature of about 38°C occurs in the
Deccan Plateau while in April, temperature
ranging between 38°C and 43°C are found
in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. In May,
the heat belt moves further north, and in the
north-western part of India, temperatures
around 48°C are not uncommon (Figure 4.8).
The hot weather season in south India is
mild and not so intense as found in north
India. The Peninsular situation of south
India with moderating effect of the oceans
keeps the temperatures lower than that
prevailing in north India. So, temperatures
remain between 26°C and 32°C. Due to
altitude, the temperatures in the hills of
Western Ghats remain below 25°C. In the
coastal regions, the north-south extent of
CLIMATE 43
Figure 4.7 : India : Pressure and Surface Winds (January)
44 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.8 : India : Mean Monthly Temperature of the Day in July
CLIMATE 45
isotherms parallel to the coast confirms that
temperature does not decrease from north
to south rather it increases from the coast
to the interior. The mean daily minimum
temperature during the summer months
also remains quite high and rarely goes
below 26°C.
Pressure and Winds : The summer months
are a period of excessive heat and falling air
pressure in the northern half of the country.
Because of the heating of the subcontinent,
the ITCZ moves northwards occupying a
position centred at 25°N in July. Roughly,
this elongated low pressure monsoon
trough extends over the Thar desert in the
north-west to Patna and Chotanagpur
plateau in the east-southeast (Figure 4.9).
The location of the ITCZ attracts a surface
circulation of the winds which are
southwesterly on the west coast as well as
along the coast of West Bengal and
Bangladesh. They are easterly or southeasterly
over north Bengal and Bihar. It has
been discussed earlier that these currents
of southwesterly monsoon are in reality
‘displaced’ equatorial westerlies. The influx
of these winds by mid-June brings about a
change in the weather towards the rainy
season.
In the heart of the ITCZ in the northwest,
the dry and hot winds known as ‘Loo’, blow
in the afternoon, and very often, they
continue to well into midnight. Dust storms
in the evening are very common during May
in Punjab, Haryana, Eastern Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh. These temporary storms
bring a welcome respite from the oppressing
heat since they bring with them light rains
and a pleasant cool breeze. Occasionally, the
moisture-laden winds are attracted towards
the periphery of the trough. A sudden
contact between dry and moist air masses
gives rise to local storms of great intensity.
These local storms are associated with
violent winds, torrential rains and even
hailstorms.
Some Famous Local Storms of Hot
Weather Season
(i) Mango Shower : Towards the end of
summer, there are pre-monsoon
showers which are a common
phenomena in Kerala and coastal
areas of Karnataka. Locally, they
are known as mango showers since
they help in the early ripening of
mangoes.
(ii) Blossom Shower : With this shower,
coffee flowers blossom in Kerala and
nearby areas.
(iii) Nor Westers : These are dreaded
evening thunderstorms in Bengal
and Assam. Their notorious nature
can be understood from the local
nomenclature of ‘Kalbaisakhi’, a
calamity of the month of Baisakh.
These showers are useful for tea,
jute and rice cultivation. In Assam,
these storms are known as “Bardoli
Chheerha”.
(iv) Loo : Hot, dry and oppressing winds
blowing in the Northern plains from
Punjab to Bihar with higher
intensity between Delhi and Patna.
THE SOUTHWEST MONSOON SEASON
As a result of rapid increase of temperature in
May over the northwestern plains, the low
pressure conditions over there get further
intensified. By early June, they are powerful
enough to attract the trade winds of Southern
Hemisphere coming from the Indian Ocean.
These southeast trade winds cross the equator
and enter the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian
Sea, only to be caught up in the air circulation
over India. Passing over the equatorial warm
currents, they bring with them moisture in
abundance. After crossing the equator, they
follow a southwesterly direction. That is why
they are known as southwest monsoons.
The rain in the southwest monsoon season
begins rather abruptly. One result of the first
rain is that it brings down the temperature
substantially. This sudden onset of the
moisture-laden winds associated with
violent thunder and lightening, is often
termed as the “break” or “burst” of the
46 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.9 : India : Pressure and Surface Winds (July)
CLIMATE 47
monsoons. The monsoon may burst in the
first week of June in the coastal areas of Kerala,
Karnataka, Goa and Maharashtra while in the
interior parts of the country, it may be delayed
to the first week of July. The day temperature
registers a decline of 5°C to 8°C between mid-
June and mid-July.
As these winds approach the land, their
southwesterly direction is modified by the relief
and thermal low pressure over the northwest
India. The monsoon approaches the landmass
in two branches:
(i) The Arabian Sea branch
(ii) The Bay of Bengal branch.
Monsoon Winds of the Arabian Sea
The monsoon winds originating over the
Arabian Sea further split into three branches:
(i) Its one branch is obstructed by the
Western Ghats. These winds climb the
slopes of the Western Ghats from
900-1200 m. Soon, they become cool,
and as a result, the windward side of the
Sahyadris and Western Coastal Plain
receive very heavy rainfall ranging
between 250 cm and 400 cm. After
crossing the Western Ghats, these winds
descend and get heated up. This reduces
humidity in the winds. As a result, these
winds cause little rainfall east of the
Western Ghats. This region of low rainfall
is known as the rain-shadow area. Find
out the rainfall at Kozhikode, Mangalore,
Pune and Bengaluru and note the
difference (Figure 4.10).
(ii) Another branch of the Arabian sea
monsoon strikes the coast north of
Mumbai. Moving along the Narmada and
Tapi river valleys, these winds cause
rainfall in extensive areas of central India.
The Chotanagpur plateau gets 15 cm
rainfall from this part of the branch.
Thereafter, they enter the Ganga plains
and mingle with the Bay of Bengal branch.
(iii) A third branch of this monsoon wind
strikes the Saurashtra Peninsula and the
Kachchh. It then passes over west
Rajasthan and along the Aravalis,
causing only a scanty rainfall. In Punjab
and Haryana, it too joins the Bay of
Bengal branch. These two branches,
reinforced by each other, cause rains in
the western Himalayas,
Monsoon Winds of the Bay of Bengal
The Bay of Bengal branch strikes the coast
of Myanmar and part of southeast
Bangladesh. But the Arakan Hills along the
coast of Myanmar deflect a big portion of this
branch towards the Indian subcontinent. The
monsoon, therefore, enters West Bengal and
Bangladesh from south and southeast
instead of from the south-westerly direction.
From here, this branch splits into two under
the influence of the Himalayas and the
thermal low is northwest India. Its one
branch moves westward along the Ganga
plains reaching as far as the Punjab plains.
The other branch moves up the Brahmaputra
valley in the north and the northeast, causing
widespread rains. Its sub-branch strikes the
Garo and Khasi hills of Meghalaya.
Mawsynram, located on the crest of Khasi
hills, receives the highest average annual
rainfall in the world.
Here it is important to know why the Tamil
Nadu coast remains dry during this season.
There are two factors responsible for it:
(i) The Tamil Nadu coast is situated
parallel to the Bay of Bengal branch of
southwest monsoon.
(ii) It lies in the rainshadow area of the
Arabian Sea branch of the south-west
monsoon.
Characteristics of Monsoonal Rainfall
(i) Rainfall received from the southwest
monsoons is seasonal in character,
which occurs between June and
September.
(ii) Monsoonal rainfall is largely governed
by relief or topography. For instance
the windward side of the Western Ghats
register a rainfall of over 250 cm. Again,
the heavy rainfall in the north-eastern
states can be attributed to their hill
ranges and the Eastern Himalayas.
48 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.10 : India : Seasonal Rainfall (June-September)
CLIMATE 49
(iii) The monsoon rainfall has a declining
trend with increasing distance from the
sea. Kolkata receives 119 cm during
the southwest monsoon period, Patna
105 cm, Allahabad 76 cm and Delhi
56 cm.
(iv) The monsoon rains occur in wet spells
of few days duration at a time. The wet
spells are interspersed with rainless
interval known as ‘breaks’. These breaks
in rainfall are related to the cyclonic
depressions mainly formed at the head
of the Bay of Bengal, and their crossing
into the mainland. Besides the frequency
and intensity of these depressions, the
passage followed by them determines
the spatial distribution of rainfall.
(v) The summer rainfall comes in a heavy
downpour leading to considerable run
off and soil erosion.
(vi) Monsoons play a pivotal role in the
agrarian economy of India because over
three-fourths of the total rain in the
country is received during the southwest
monsoon season.
(vii) Its spatial distribution is also uneven
which ranges from 12 cm to more than
250 cm.
(viii) The beginning of the rains sometimes
is considerably delayed over the whole
or a part of the country.
(ix) The rains sometimes end considerably
earlier than usual, causing great
damage to standing crops and making
the sowing of winter crops difficult.
Season of Retreating Monsoon
The months of October and November are
known for retreating monsoons. By the end
of September, the southwest monsoon
becomes weak as the low pressure trough of
the Ganga plain starts moving southward in
response to the southward march of the sun.
The monsoon retreats from the western
Rajasthan by the first week of September. It
withdraws from Rajasthan, Gujarat, Western
Ganga plain and the Central Highlands by the
end of the month. By the beginning of October,
the low pressure covers northern parts of the
Bay of Bengal and by early November, it moves
over Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. By the
middle of December, the centre of low pressure
is completely removed from the Peninsula.
The retreating southwest monsoon season
is marked by clear skies and rise in
temperature. The land is still moist. Owing to
the conditions of high temperature and
humidity, the weather becomes rather
oppressive. This is commonly known as the
‘October heat’. In the second half of October,
the mercury begins to fall rapidly, particularly
in northern India. The weather in the
retreating monsoon is dry in north India but
it is associated with rain in the eastern part of
the Peninsula. Here, October and November
are the rainiest months of the year.
The widespread rain in this season is
associated with the passage of cyclonic
depressions which originate over the
Andaman Sea and manage to cross the
eastern coast of the southern Peninsula. These
tropical cyclones are very destructive. The
thickly populated deltas of the Godavari,
Krishna and Kaveri are their preferred targets.
Every year cyclones bring disaster here. A few
cyclonic storms also strike the coast of West
Bengal, Bangladesh and Myanmar. A bulk of
the rainfall of the Coromondal coast is derived
from these depressions and cyclones. Such
cyclonic storms are less frequent in the
Arabian Sea.
TRADITIONAL INDIAN SEASONS
In the Indian tradition, a year is divided into
six two-monthly seasons. This cycle of seasons,
which the common people in north and central
India follow is based on their practical
experience and age-old perception of weather
phenomena. However, this system does not
match with the seasons of south India where
there is little variation in the seasons.
Seasons Months Months
(According to the (According to the
Indian Calendar) Indian Calendar)
Vasanta Chaitra-Vaisakha March-April
Grishma Jyaistha-Asadha May-June
Varsha Sravana-Bhadra July-August
Sharada Asvina-Kartika September-October
Hemanta Margashirsa-Pausa November-December
Shishira Magha-Phalguna January-February
50 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Distribution of Rainfall
The average annual rainfall in India is about
125 cm, but it has great spatial variations
(Figure 4.11).
Areas of High Rainfall : The highest rainfall
occurs along the west coast, on the Western
Ghats, as well as in the sub-Himalayan areas
is the northeast and the hills of Meghalaya. Here
the rainfall exceeds 200 cm. In some parts of
Khasi and Jaintia hills, the rainfall exceeds
1,000 cm. In the Brahmaputra valley and the
adjoining hills, the rainfall is less then 200 cm.
Areas of Medium Rainfall : Rainfall between
100-200 cm is received in the southern parts
of Gujarat, east Tamil Nadu, northeastern
Peninsula covering Odisha, Jharkhand, Bihar,
eastern Madhya Pradesh, northern Ganga plain
along the sub-Himalayas and the Cachar Valley
and Manipur.
Areas of Low Rainfall : Western Uttar Pradesh,
Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir,
eastern Rajasthan, Gujarat and Deccan Plateau
receive rainfall between 50-100 cm.
Areas of Inadequate Rainfall: Parts of the
Peninsula, especially in Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka and Maharashtra, Ladakh and most
of western Rajasthan receive rainfall below 50 cm.
Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan
region.
Identify the pattern of rainfall after
consulting the rainfall map.
Variability of Rainfall
A characteristic feature of rainfall in India is its
variability. The variability of rainfall is computed
with the help of the following formula:
C.V.
Standard Deviation
Mean
= × 100
where C.V. is the coefficient of variation.
The values of coefficient of variation show
the change from the mean values of rainfall. The
actual rainfall in some places deviates from
20-50 per cent. The values of coefficient of
variation show variability of rainfall in India. A
variability of less than 25 per cent exists on the
western coasts, Western Ghats, northeastern
Peninsula, eastern plains of the Ganga, northeastern
India, Uttarakhand and Himachal
Pradesh and south-western part of Jammu and
Kashmir. These areas have an annual rainfall
of over 100 cm. A variability of over 50 per cent
exists in the western part of Rajasthan, northern
part of Jammu and Kashmir and interior parts
of the Deccan plateau. These areas have an
annual rainfall of less than 50 cm. Rest of India
have a variability of 25-50 per cent and these
areas receive an annual rainfall between
50 -100 cm (Figure 4.12).
Climatic Regions of India
The whole of India has a monsoon type of
climate. But the combination of elements of the
weather, however, reveal many regional
variations. These variations represent the subtypes
of the monsoon climate. It is on this basis
that the climatic regions can be identified. A
climatic region has a homogeneous climatic
condition which is the result of a combination
of factors. Temperature and rainfall are two
important elements which are considered to be
decisive in all the schemes of climatic
classification. The classification of climate,
however, is a complex exercise. There are
different schemes of classification of climate.
Major climatic types of India based on
Koeppen’s scheme have been described below:
Koeppen based his scheme of Climatic
classification on monthly values of temperature
and precipitation. He identified five major
climatic types, namely:
(i) Tropical climates, where mean monthly
temperature throughout the year is over
18°C.
(ii) Dry climates, where precipitation is very
low in comparison to temperature, and
hence, dry. If dryness is less, it is semiarid
(S); if it is more, the climate is arid(W).
(iii) Warm temperate climates, where mean
temperature of the coldest month is
between 18°C and minus 3°C.
(iv) Cool temperate climates, where mean
temperature of the warmest month is over
10°C, and mean temperature of the
coldest month is under minus 3°C.
(v) Ice climates, where mean temperature of
the warmest month is under 10°C.
CLIMATE 51
Figure 4.11 : India : Annual Rainfall
52 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.12 : India : Variability of Annual Rainfall
CLIMATE 53
Koeppen used letter symbols to denote
climatic types as given above. Each type is
further sub-divided into sub-types on the
basis of seasonal variations in the
distributional pattern of rainfall and
temperature. He used S for semi-arid and W
for arid and the following small letters to define
sub-types: f (sufficient precipitation), m (rain
forest despite a dry monsoon season), w (dry
season in winter), h (dry and hot), c (less than
four months with mean temperature over
10°C), and g (Gangetic plain). Accordingly,
India can be divided into eight climatic regions
(Table 4.1; Figure 4.13).
Monsoons and the Economic Life in India
(i) Monsoon is that axis around which
revolves the entire agricultural cycle of
India. It is because about 64 per cent
people of India depend on agriculture for
their livelihood and agriculture itself is
based on southwest monsoon.
(ii) Except Himalayas all the parts of the
country have temperature above the
threashold level to grow the crops or
plants throughout the year..
(iii) Regional variations in monsoon climate
help in growing various types of crops.
(iv) Variability of rainfall brings droughts or
floods every year in some parts of the country.
(v) Agricultural prosperity of India depends
very much on timely and adequately
distributed rainfall. If it fails, agriculture
is adversely affected particularly in those
regions where means of irrigation are not
developed.
(vi) Sudden monsoon burst creates problem
of soil erosion over large areas in India.
(vii) Winter rainfall by temperate cyclones in
north India is highly beneficial for rabi crops.
(viii) Regional climatic variation in India is
reflected in the vast variety of food, clothes
and house types.
GLOBAL WARMING
You know that change is the law of nature.
Climate has also witnessed change in the past
at the global as well as at local levels. It is
changing even now but the change is
imperceptible. A number of geological
evidences suggest that once upon a time,
(see geological time scale in Chapter 2 of
Fundamentals of Physical Geography, NCERT,
2006) large part of the earth was under ice cover.
Now you might have read or heard the debate
on global warming. Besides the natural causes,
human activities such as large scale
industrialisation and presence of polluting gas
in the atmosphere are also important factors
responsible for global warming. You might have
heard about the “green house effect” while
discussing global warming.
The temperature of the world is
significantly increasing. Carbon dioxide
produced by human activities is a major
source of concern. This gas, released to the
atmosphere in large quantities by burning
of fossil fuel, is increasing gradually. Other
gases like methane, chlorofluorocarbons,
and nitrous oxide which are present in much
smaller concentrations in the atmosphere,
together with carbon dioxide are known as
green house gases. These gases are better
absorbers of long wave radiations than carbon
Table 4.1 : Climatic Regions of India According to Koeppen’s Scheme
Type of Climate Areas
Amw Monsoon with short dry season West coast of India south of Goa
As – Monsoon with dry summer Coromandel coast of Tamil Nadu
Aw – Tripical savannah Most of the Peninsular plateaus, south of the Tropic of Cancer
Bwhw – Semi-arid steppe climate North-western Gujarat, some parts of western Rajasthan and
Punjab
Bwhw – Hot desert Extreme western Rajasthan
Cwg – Monsoon with dry winter Ganga plain, eastern Rajasthan, northern Madhya Pradesh,
most of North-east India
Dfc – Cold humid winter with short summer Arunachal Pradesh
E – Polar type Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand
54 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 4.13 : India : Climatic Regions According to Koppen’s Scheme
CLIMATE 55
dioxide, and so, are more effective at
enhancing the green house effect. These
gases have been contributing to global
warming. It is said that due to global warming
the polar ice caps and mountain glaciers
would melt and the amount of water in the
oceans would increase.
The mean annual surface temperature
of the earth in the past 150 years has
increased. It is projected that by the year
2,100, global temperature will increase by
about 2°C. This rise in temperature will
cause many other changes: one of these is a
rise in sea level, as a result of melting of
glaciers and sea-ice due to warming.
According to the current prediction, on an
average, the sea level will rise 48 cm by the
end of twenty first century. This would
increase the incidence of annual flooding.
Climatic change would promote insectborne
diseases like malaria, and lead to shift
in climatic boundaries, making some
regions wetter and others drier. Agricultural
pattern would shift and human population
as well as the ecosystem would experience
change. What would happen to the Indian
sea coasts if the sea level rises 50 cm above
the present one?
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) What causes rainfall on the coastal areas of Tamil Nadu in the beginning
of winters?
(a) South-West monsoon (c) North-Eastern monsoon
(b) Temperate cyclones (d) Local air circulation
(ii) What is the proportion of area of India which receives annual rainfall less
than 75 cm?
(a) Half (c) Two-third
(b) One-third (d) Three-fourth
(iii) Which one of the following is not a fact regarding South India?
(a) Diurnal range of temperature is less here.
(b) Annual range of temperature is less here.
(c) Temperatures here are high throughout the year.
(d) Extreme climatic conditions are found here.
(iv) Which one of the following phenomenon happens when the sun shines
vertically over the Tropic of Capricorn in the southern hemisphere?
(a) High pressure develops over North-western India due to low
temperatures.
(b) Low pressure develops over North-western India due to high
temperatures.
(c) No changes in temperature and pressure occur in north-western
India.
(d) ‘Loo’ blows in the North-western India.
(v) In which of the following states in India do we find ‘As’ type of climate as
per Koeppen’s classification?
(a) In Kerala and coastal Karnataka
(b) In Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(c) On Coromandel coast
(d) In Assam and Arunachal Pradesh
EXERCISES
56 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What are the three important factors which influence the mechanism of
Indian weather?
(ii) What is the Inter-Tropical Convergene Zone?
(iii) What is meant by ‘bursting of monsoon’? Name the place of India which
gets the highest rainfall.
(iv) Define ‘climatic region’? What are the bases of Koeppen’s classification?
(v) Which type(s) of cyclones cause rainfall in north-western India during
winter? Where do they originate?
3. Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) Notwithstanding the broad climatic unity, the climate of India has many
regional variations. Elaborate this statement giving suitable examples.
(ii) How many distinct seasons are found in India as per the Indian
Meteorological Department? Discuss the weather conditions associated
with any one season in detail.
Project/Activity
On the outline map of India, show the following:
(i) Areas of winter rain
(ii) Wind direction during the summer season
(iii) Areas having variability of rainfall over 50 per cent
(iv) Areas having less than 15°C temperature in January
(v) Isohyte of 100 cm.