WATER IN THE ATMOSPHEREYou have already learnt that the aircontains water vapour. It varies fromzero to four per cent by volume of theatmosphere and plays an important role in theweather phenomena. Water is present in theatmosphere in three forms namely Œ gaseous,liquid and solid. The moisture in the
atmosphere is derived from water bodiesthrough evaporation and from plants throughtranspiration. Thus, there is a continuous
exchange of water between the atmosphere, theoceans and the continents through theprocesses of evaporation, transpiration,condensation and precipitation.Water vapour present in the air is knownas humidity.  It is expressed quantitatively indifferent ways. The actual amount of the watervapour present in the atmosphere is known as
the absolute humidity. It is the weight of watervapour per unit volume of air and is expressed
in terms of grams per cubic metre. The ability
of the air to hold water vapour depends entirelyon its temperature. The absolute humiditydiffers from place to place on the surface of the
earth. The percentage of moisture present inthe atmosphere as compared to its full capacityat a given temperature is known as the relativehumidity. With the change of air temperature,the capacity to retain moisture increases ordecreases and the relative humidity is also
affected. It is greater over the oceans and leastover the continents.The air containing moisture to its fullcapacity at a given temperature is said to be
saturated. It means that the air at the giventemperature is incapable of holding anyadditional amount of moisture at that stage.The temperature at which saturation occursin a given sample of air is known as dew point.EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATIONThe amount of water vapour in the atmosphereis added or withdrawn due to evaporation andcondensation respectively. Evaporation is aprocess by which water is transformed fromliquid to gaseous state. Heat is the main causefor evaporation. The temperature at which the
water starts evaporating is referred to as thelatent heat of vapourisation.Increase in temperature increases waterabsorption and retention capacity of the givenparcel of air. Similarly, if the moisture contentis low, air has a potentiality of absorbing andretaining moisture. Movement of air replaces
the saturated layer with the unsaturated layer.Hence, the greater the movement of air, thegreater is the evaporation.The transformation of water vapour intowater is called condensation. Condensation iscaused by the loss of heat. When moist air is
cooled, it may reach a level when its capacityto hold water vapour ceases. Then, the excesswater vapour condenses into liquid form. If it
directly condenses into solid form, it is knownas sublimation. In free air, condensation resultsfrom cooling around very small particlestermed as hygroscopic condensation nuclei.Particles of dust, smoke and salt from the oceanare particularly good nuclei because they
absorb water.  Condensation also takes placewhen the moist air comes in contact with somecolder object and it may also take place when
the temperature is close to the dew point.Condensation, therefore, depends upon theamount of cooling and the relative humidity of
the air. Condensation is influenced by thevolume of air, temperature, pressure andhumidity. Condensation takes place:  (i) whenCHAPTER
WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE99the temperature of the air is reduced to dewpoint with its volume remaining constant; (ii)when both the volume and the temperature arereduced; (iv) when moisture is added to the airthrough evaporation. However, the mostfavourable condition for condensation is the
decrease in air temperature.After condensation the water vapour or themoisture in the atmosphere takes one of the
following forms Š dew, frost, fog and clouds.Forms of condensation can be classified on thebasis of temperature and location.
Condensation takes place when the dew pointis lower than the freezing point as well ashigher than the freezing point.DewWhen the moisture is deposited in the form ofwater droplets on cooler surfaces of solid
objects (rather than nuclei in air above thesurface) such as stones, grass blades and plantleaves, it is known as dew. The ideal conditionsfor its formation are clear sky, calm air, highrelative humidity, and cold and long nights.For the formation of dew, it is necessary thatthe dew point is above the freezing point.FrostFrost forms on cold surfaces whencondensation takes place below freezing point(00C), i.e. the dew point is at or below thefreezing point. The excess moisture is depositedin the form of minute ice crystals instead ofwater droplets. The ideal conditions for the
formation of white frost are the same as thosefor the formation of dew, except that the airtemperature must be at or below the freezing
point.Fog and MistWhen the temperature of an air masscontaining a large quantity of water vapour fallsall of a sudden, condensation takes place withinitself on fine dust particles. So, the fog is a cloudwith its base at or very near to the ground.Because of the fog and mist, the visibilitybecomes poor to zero. In urban and industrial
centres smoke provides plenty of nuclei whichhelp the formation of fog and mist. Such acondition when fog is mixed with smoke, isdescribed as smog. The only difference betweenthe mist and fog is that mist contains moremoisture than the fog. In mist each nucelicontains a thicker layer of moisture. Mists arefrequent over mountains as the rising warm
air up the slopes meets a cold surface. Fogsare drier than mist and they are prevalent wherewarm currents of air come in contact with cold
currents. Fogs are mini clouds in whichcondensation takes place around nucleiprovided by the dust, smoke, and the salt
particles.CloudsCloud is a mass of minute water droplets ortiny crystals of ice formed by the condensationof the water vapour in free air at considerableelevations. As the clouds are formed at some
height over the surface of the earth, they takevarious shapes. According to their height,expanse, density and transparency or
opaqueness clouds are grouped under fourtypes : (i) cirrus; (ii) cumulus; (iii) stratus;(iv) nimbus.CirrusCirrus clouds are formed at high altitudes(8,000 - 12,000m).  They 
are thin and detatchedclouds having a feathery appearance. They arealways white in colour.CumulusCumulus clouds look like cotton wool. Theyare generally formed at a height of 4,000 -7,000 m. They exist in patches and can be seenscattered here and there.  They have a flat base.StratusAs their name implies, these are layered cloudscovering large portions of the sky.  These cloudsare generally formed either due to loss of heator the mixing of air masses with differenttemperatures.NimbusNimbus clouds are black or dark gray. Theyform at middle levels or very near to the surface
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY100of the earth. These are extremely dense andopaque to the rays of the sun. Sometimes, the
clouds are so low that they seem to touch theground. Nimbus clouds are shapeless massesof thick vapour.PrecipitationThe process of continuous condensation in freeair helps the condensed particles to grow insize. When the resistance of the air fails to hold
them against the force of gravity, they fall on to
the earth™s surface. So after the condensation
of water vapour, the release of moisture is
known as precipitation. This may take placein liquid or solid form. The precipitation in theform of water is called rainfall, when thetemperature is lower than the 00C, precipitationtakes place in the form of fine flakes of snowand is called snowfall. Moisture is released inthe form of hexagonal crystals. These crystalsform flakes of snow. Besides rain and snow,
other forms of precipitation are sleet and hail,though the latter are limited in occurrence and
are sporadic in both time and space.Sleet is frozen raindrops and refrozenmelted snow-water. When a layer of air withthe temperature above freezing point overlies
a subfreezing layer near the ground,
precipitation takes place in the form of sleet.Raindrops, which leave the warmer air,encounter the colder air below. As a result, theysolidify and reach the ground as small pellets
of ice not bigger than the raindrops from which
they are formed.Sometimes, drops of rain after beingreleased by the clouds become solidified into
small rounded solid pieces of ice and which
reach the surface of the earth are called
hailstones. These are formed by the rainwaterpassing through the colder layers.   Hailstones
have several concentric layers of ice one over
the other.Types of RainfallOn the basis of origin, rainfall may be classifiedinto three main types Œ the convectional,
orographic or relief and the cyclonic or frontal.Convectional RainThe, air on being heated, becomes light andrises up in convection currents. As it rises,  it
expands and loses heat and consequently,
condensation takes place and cumulous
clouds are formed. With thunder and lightening,heavy rainfall takes place but this does not lastA combination of these four basic types cangive rise to the following types of clouds: highclouds Œ cirrus, cirrostratus, cirrocumulus;middle clouds Œ altostratus and altocumulus;low clouds Œ stratocumulus and nimbostratusand clouds with extensive verticaldevelopment Œ cumulus and cumulonimbus.Identify these cloud types which areshown in Figure 11.1 and 11.2.Figure 11.1
Figure 11.2

WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE101long. Such rain is common in the summer orin the hotter part of the day. It is very commonin the equatorial regions and interior parts of
the continents, particularly in the northern
hemisphere.Orographic RainWhen the saturated air mass comes across amountain, it is forced to ascend and as it rises,
it expands; the temperature falls, and the
moisture is condensed. The chief characteristic
of this sort of rain is that the windward slopes
receive greater rainfall. After giving rain on thewindward side, when these winds reach the
other slope, they descend, and their
temperature rises. Then their capacity to take
in moisture increases and hence, these leeward
slopes remain rainless and dry. The area
situated on the leeward side, which gets less
rainfall is known as the rain-shadow area.  Itis also known as the relief rain.Cyclonic RainYou have already read about extra tropicalcyclones and cyclonic rain in Chapter 10.
Please consult Chapter 10 to understandcyclonic rainfall.World Distribution of RainfallDifferent places on the earth™s surface receivedifferent amounts of rainfall in a year and that
too in different seasons.In general, as we proceed from the equatortowards the poles, rainfall goes on decreasing
steadily. The coastal areas of the world receive
greater amounts of rainfall than the interior ofthe continents. The rainfall is more over theoceans than on the landmasses of the world
because of being great sources of water.Between the latitudes 350 and 400 N and S ofthe equator, the rain is heavier on the easterncoasts and goes on decreasing towards thewest. But, between 450 and 650 N and S ofequator, due to the westerlies, the rainfall isfirst received on the western margins of thecontinents and it goes on decreasing towardsthe east. Wherever mountains run parallel to
the coast, the rain is greater on the coastal
plain, on the windward side and it decreasestowards the leeward side.On the basis of the total amount of annualprecipitation, major precipitation regimes of theworld are identified as follows.The equatorial belt, the windward slopesof the mountains along the western coasts in
the cool temperate zone and the coastal areasof the monsoon land receive heavy rainfall of
over 200 cm per annum. Interior continental
areas receive moderate rainfall varying from
100 - 200 cm per annum. The coastal areas of
the continents receive moderate amount of
rainfall. The central parts of the tropical land
and the eastern and interior parts of the
temperate lands receive rainfall varying
between 50-100 cm per annum. Areas lying

in the rain shadow zone of the interior of the
continents and high latitudes receive very low
rainfall-less than 50 cm per annum. Seasonal
distribution of rainfall provides an important
aspect to judge its effectiveness. In some
regions rainfall is distributed evenly
throughout the year such as in the equatorial
belt and in the western parts of cool temperateregions.EXERCISES1.Multiple choice questions.
(i)Which one of the following is the most important constituent of the
atmosphere for human beings?(a) Water vapour(c) Dust particle
(b) Nitrogen(d) Oxygen
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY102 (ii)Which one of the following process is responsible for transforming liquid
into vapour?(a) Condensation(c) Evaporation(b) Transpiration(d) Precipitation(iii)The air that contains moisture to its full capacity :(a) Relative humidity(c) Absolute humidity
(b) Specific humidity(d) Saturated air
(iv)Which one of the following is the highest cloud in the sky?
(a) Cirrus(c) Nimbus(b) Stratus(d) Cumulus
2.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)Name the three types of precipitation.
(ii)Explain relative humidity.(iii)Why does the amount of water vapour decreases rapidly with altitude?(iv)How are clouds formed? Classify  them.3.Answer the following questions in about 150 words.
(i)Discuss the salient features of the world distribution of precipitation.
(ii)What are forms of condensation?  Describe the process of dew and frostformation.Project WorkBrowse through the newspaper from 1st June to 31st December and note the newsabout extreme rainfall in different parts of the country.
