You have observed water flowing through
the rivers, nalas and even channels
during rainy season which drain theexcess water. Had these channels not been

there, large-scale flooding would have

occurred. Wherever channels are ill-defined or
choked, flooding is a common phenomenon.The flow of water through well-defined
channels is known as ‚drainage™ and the
network of such channels is called a

‚drainage system™. The drainage pattern
of an area is the outcome of the geological
time period, nature and structure of
rocks, topography, slope, amount of
water flowing and the periodicity of

the flow.Do you have a river near your village or city?Have you ever been there for boating or bathing?
Is it perennial (always with water) or ephemeral
(water during rainy season, and dry, otherwise)?
Do you know that rivers flow in the same
direction? You have studied about 
slopes in theother two textbooks of geography (NCERT,
2006) in this class . Can you, then, explain the
reason for water flowing from one direction to

the other? Why do the rivers originating from the
Himalayas in the northern 
India and the Western
Ghat in the southern India flow towards the east

and discharge their waters in the Bay of Bengal?A river drains the water collected from a
specific area, which is called its ‚catchment area™.
An area drained by a river and its tributaries
is called a drainage basin. The 
boundary lineDRAINAGE SYSTEMCHAPTERImportant Drainage Patterns(i)The drainage pattern resembling the branches of a tree is known as ﬁdendriticﬂ the examples
of which are the rivers of northern plain.
(ii)When the rivers originate from a hill and flow in all directions, the drainage pattern is knownas ‚radial™. The rivers originating from the Amarkantak range present a good example of it.(iii)When the primary tributaries of rivers flow parallel to each other and secondary tributaries
join them at right angles, the pattern is known as ‚trellis™.(iv)When the 
rivers discharge their waters from all directions in a lake or depression, thepattern is know as ‚centripetal™.Find out some of the patterns in the topo sheet given in Chapter 5 of 
Practical Work in
GeographyŒ Part I (NCERT, 2006)
.Figure 3.1 : A River in the Mountainous Region
