In the previous chapter, you have studied theinterior of the earth. You are already familiar
with the world map. You know that continentscover 29 per cent of the surface of the earthand the remainder is under oceanic waters.The positions of the continents and the oceanbodies, as we see them in the map, have notbeen the same in the past. Moreover, it is now

a well-accepted fact that oceans andcontinents will not continue to enjoy theirpresent positions in times to come.  If this is
so, the question arises what were their positionsin the past? Why and how do they change their
positions? Even if it is true that the continentsand oceans have changed and are changingtheir positions, you may wonder as to howscientists know this. How have they determinedtheir earlier positions? You will find the answersto some of these and related questions in this
chapter.CONTINENTAL DRIFTObserve the shape of the coastline of the Atlantic
Ocean. You will be surprised by the symmetryof the coastlines on either side of the ocean. Nowonder, many scientists thought of this
similarity and considered the possibility of thetwo Americas, Europe and Africa, to be oncejoined together. From the known records of thehistory of science, it was Abraham Ortelius, aDutch map maker, who first proposed such a
possibility as early as 1596. Antonio Pellegrinidrew a map showing the three continents together.However, it was Alfred Wegener
Ša German
meteorologist who put forth a 
comprehensiveargument in the form of  ﬁ
the continental driftDISTRIBUTION OF OCEANSAND CONTINENTSCHAPTERtheoryﬂ in 
1912. 
This was regarding thedistribution of the oceans and the continents.
According to Wegener, all the continentsformed a single continental mass and megaocean surrounded the same.  The supercontinent was named PANGAEA, which meantall earth. The mega-ocean was calledPANTHALASSA, meaning all water. He arguedthat, around 200 million years ago, the supercontinent, Pangaea, began to split. Pangaea firstbroke into two large continental masses asLaurasia and Gondwanaland forming the
northern and southern componentsrespectively. Subse-quently, Laurasia andGondwanaland continued to break into various
smaller continents that exist today. A variety ofevidence was offered in support of thecontinental drift. Some of these are given below.Evidence in Support of the Continental DriftThe Matching of Continents (Jig-Saw-Fit)The shorelines of Africa and South Americafacing each other have a remarkable andunmistakable match. It may be noted that amap produced using a computer programmeto find the best fit of the Atlantic margin waspresented by Bullard in 1964. It proved to bequite perfect. The match was tried at 1,000-
fathom line instead of the present shoreline.Rocks of Same Age Across the OceansThe radiometric dating methods developed inthe recent period have facilitated correlating the
rock formation from different continents across
