WATER (OCEANS)This unit deals with’Hydrological Cycle’Oceans Š submarine relief; distribution of temperature andsalinity; movements of ocean water-waves, tides and currentsUNITV
WATER (OCEANS)the ocean to land and land to ocean. Thehydrological cycle describes the movement of
water on, in, and above the earth. The watercycle has been working for billions of yearsand all the life on earth depends on it. Next toair, water is the most important elementrequired for the existence of life on earth. Thedistribution of water on earth is quite uneven.Many locations have plenty of water whileothers have very limited quantity. Thehydrological cycle, is the circulation of waterwithin the earth™s hydrosphere in differentforms i.e. the liquid, solid and the gaseousphases. It also refers to the continuousexchange of water between the oceans,CHAPTERFigure 13.1 : Hydrological CycleCan we think of life without water? It issaid that the water is life.  Water is anessential component of all life forms thatexist over the surface of the earth.  The creatures
on the earth are lucky that it is a water planet,
otherwise we all would have no existence. Wateris a rare commodity in our solar system. There
is no water on the sun or anywhere else in the
solar system.  The earth, fortunately has an
abundant supply of water on its surface. Hence,
our planet is called the ‚Blue Planet™.HYDROLOGICAL CYCLEWater is a cyclic resource. It can be used andre-used. Water also undergoes a cycle from
WA
TER (OCEANS)113atmosphere, landsurface and subsurface andthe organisms.Table 13.1 shows distribution of water onthe surface of the earth. About 71 per cent ofthe planetary water is found in the oceans. Theremaining is held as freshwater in glaciers and
icecaps, groundwater sources, lakes, soilmoisture, atmosphere, streams and within life.Nearly 59 per cent of the water that falls onland returns to the atmosphere throughevaporation from over the oceans as well as
from other places. The remainder runs-off onthe surface, infiltrates into the ground or a partof it becomes glacier (Figure 13.1).It is to be noted that the renewable wateron the earth is constant while the demand is
increasing tremendously. This leads to watercrisis in different parts of the world Š spatially
and temporally. The pollution of river waters
has further aggravated the crisis.  How can youintervene in improving the water quality andaugmenting the available quantity of water?RELIEF OF THE OCEAN FLOORThe oceans are confined to the greatdepressions of the earth™s outer layer. In thissection, we shall see the nature of the ocean
basins of the earth and their topography. The
oceans, unlike the continents, merge sonaturally into one another that it is hard todemarcate them. The geographers have dividedthe oceanic part of the earth into five oceans,
namely the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian,
Southern ocean and the Arctic. The variousseas, bays, gulfs and other inlets are parts ofthese four large oceans.A major portion of the ocean floor is foundbetween 3-6 km below the sea level. The ‚land™
under the waters of the oceans, that is, theocean floor exhibits complex and variedfeatures as those observed over the land(Figure 13.2). The floors of the oceans arerugged with the world™s largest mountainranges, deepest trenches and the largest plains.These features are formed, like those of thecontinents, by the factors of tectonic, volcanicand depositional processes.Divisions of the Ocean FloorsThe ocean floors can be divided into four majordivisions: (i) the Continental Shelf; (ii) theContinental Slope; (iii) the Deep Sea Plain;(iv) the Oceanic Deeps. Besides, these divisionsthere are also major and minor relief features
in the ocean floors like ridges, hills, seamounts, guyots, trenches, canyons, etc.Continental ShelfThe continental shelf is the extended marginof each continent occupied by relatively
shallow seas and gulfs. It is the shallowest partof the ocean showing an average gradient of1° or even less. The shelf typically ends at avery steep slope, called the shelf break.The width of the continental shelves varyfrom one ocean to another. The average widthTable 13.1 : Water on the Earth™s surfaceReservoirVolumePercentage(Millionof the TotalCubic km )Oceans1,37097.25
Ice Caps292.05and GlaciersGroundwater9.50.68Lakes0.1250.01Soil Moisture0.0650.005
Atmosphere0.0130.001
Streams0.00170.0001
and RiversBiosphere0.00060.00004Table 13.2 : Components  and  Processes    of the Water CycleComponentsProcessesWater storageEvaporationin oceansEvapotranspirationSublimationWater in theCondensationatmospherePrecipitationWater storage inSnowmelt runoffice and snowto streamsSurface runoffStream flow freshwater
storage infiltrationGroundwater storageGroundwaterdischarge springs
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY114of continental shelves is about 80 km. Theshelves are almost absent or very narrow along
some of the margins like the coasts of Chile,the west coast of Sumatra, etc. On the contrary,the Siberian shelf in the Arctic Ocean, thelargest in the world, stretches to 1,500 km inwidth. The depth of the shelves also varies. It
may be as shallow as 30 m in some areas whilein some areas it is as deep as 600 m.The continental shelves are covered withvariable thicknesses of sediments broughtdown by rivers, glaciers, wind, from the land
and distributed by waves and currents. Massivesedimentary deposits received over a long timeby the continental shelves, become the sourceof fossil fuels.Continental SlopeThe continental slope connects the continentalshelf and the ocean basins. It begins where thebottom of the continental shelf sharply dropsoff into a steep slope. The gradient of the sloperegion varies between 2-5°. The depth of theslope region varies between 200 and 3,000 m.
The slope boundary indicates the end of thecontinents. Canyons and trenches are observedin this region.Deep Sea PlainDeep sea plains are gently sloping areas of theocean basins. These are the flattest andsmoothest regions of the world. The depthsvary between 3,000 and 6,000m. These plainsare covered with fine-grained sediments likeclay and silt.Oceanic Deeps or TrenchesThese areas are the deepest parts of the oceans.The trenches are relatively steep sided, narrowbasins.  They are some 3-5 km deeper thanthe surrounding ocean floor. They occur at thebases of continental slopes and along islandarcs and are associated with active volcanoesand strong earthquakes. That is why they arevery significant in the study of platemovements. As many as 57 deeps have been
explored so far; of which 32 are in the PacificOcean; 19 in the Atlantic Ocean and 6 in theIndian Ocean.Minor Relief FeaturesApart from the above mentioned major relieffeatures of the ocean floor, some minor butsignificant features predominate in different
parts of the oceans.Mid-Oceanic RidgesA mid-oceanic ridge is composed of two chainsof mountains separated by a large depression.The mountain ranges can have peaks as highas 2,500 m and some even reach above theocean™s surface. Iceland, a part of the mid-Atlantic Ridge, is an example.Figure 13.2 : Relief features of ocean floors
WA
TER (OCEANS)115SeamountIt is a mountain with pointed summits, risingfrom the seafloor that does not reach the surfaceof the ocean. Seamounts are volcanic in origin.These can be 3,000-4,500 m tall. The Emperorseamount, an extension of the Hawaiian Islandsin the Pacific Ocean, is a good example.Submarine CanyonsThese are deep valleys, some comparable to theGrand Canyon of the Colorado river. They aresometimes found cutting across the continentalshelves and slopes, often extending from themouths of large rivers. The Hudson Canyon isthe best known submarine canyon in the world.GuyotsIt is a flat topped seamount. They showevidences of gradual subsidence throughstages to become flat topped submergedmountains. It is estimated that more than10,000 seamounts and guyots exist in thePacific Ocean alone.AtollThese are low islands found in the tropicaloceans consisting of  coral reefs surroundinga central depression. It may be a part of thesea (lagoon), or sometimes form enclosing a
body of fresh, brackish, or highly saline water.TEMPERATURE OF OCEAN WATERSThis section deals with the spatial and vertical
variations of temperature in various oceans.Ocean waters get heated up by the solar energyjust as land. The process of heating and coolingof the oceanic water is slower than land.Factors Affecting Temperature DistributionThe factors which affect the distribution oftemperature of ocean water are :(i)Latitude : the temperature of surface waterdecreases from the equator towards thepoles because the amount of insolation
decreases poleward.(ii)Unequal distribution of land and water :the oceans in the northern hemispherereceive more heat due to their contact with
larger extent of land than the oceans in
the southern hemisphere.(iii)Prevailing wind : the winds blowing fromthe land towards the oceans drive warmsurface water away form the coastresulting in the upwelling of cold water
from below. It results into the longitudinalvariation in the temperature. Contrary tothis, the onshore winds pile up warmwater near the coast and this raises thetemperature.(iv)Ocean currents : warm ocean currentsraise the temperature in cold areas while
the cold currents decrease thetemperature in warm ocean areas.  Gulfstream (warm current) raises the
temperature near the eastern coast ofNorth America and the West Coast ofEurope while the Labrador current (cold
current) lowers the temperature near thenorth-east coast of North America.All these factors influence the temperatureof the ocean currents locally. The enclosed seas
in the low latitudes record relatively highertemperature than the open seas; whereas theenclosed seas in the high latitudes have lower
temperature than the open seas.Horizontal and Vertical Distributionof TemperatureThe temperature-depth profile for the oceanwater shows how the temperature decreases
with the increasing depth. The profile shows  aboundary region between the surface watersof the ocean and the deeper layers. Theboundary usually begins around 100 - 400 mbelow the sea surface and extends severalhundred of metres downward (Figure 13.3).This boundary region, from where there is a
rapid decrease of temperature, is called thethermocline. About 90 per cent of the totalvolume of water is found below the thermoclinein the deep ocean. In this zone, temperaturesapproach 0° C.The temperature structure of oceans overmiddle and low latitudes can be described asa three-layer system from surface to the bottom.The first layer represents the top layer of
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY116The third layer is very cold and extendsupto the deep ocean floor. In the Arctic andAntartic circles, the surface water temperaturesare close to 0° C and so the temperature changewith the depth is very slight. Here, only onelayer of cold water exists, which extends from
surface to deep ocean floor.The average temperature of surface waterof the oceans is about 27°C and it graduallydecreases from the equator towards the poles.The rate of decrease of temperature with
increasing latitude is generally 0.5°C perlatitude. The average temperature is around22°C at 20° latitudes, 14° C at 40° latitudesand 0° C near poles. The oceans in the northernhemisphere record relatively higher temperaturethan in the southern hemisphere. The highest
temperature is not recorded at the equator but
slightly towards north of it. The average annualtemperatures for the northern and southernhemisphere are around 19° C and 16° C
respectively. This variation is due to theunequal distribution of land and water in thenorthern and southern hemispheres. Figure
13.4 shows the spatial pattern of surface
temperature of the oceans.It is a well known fact that the maximumtemperature of the oceans is always at their
surfaces because they directly receive the heatfrom the sun and the heat is transmitted tothe lower sections of the oceans through the
process of convection. It results into decreaseof temperature with the increasing depth, butthe rate of decrease is not uniform throughout.
The temperature falls very rapidly up to the
depth of 200m and thereafter, the rate ofdecrease of temperature is slowed down.SALINITY OF OCEAN WATERSAll waters in nature, whether rain water orocean water, contain dissolved mineral salts.Salinity is the term used to define the totalcontent of dissolved salts in sea water(Table 13.4). It is calculated as the amount ofsalt (in gm) dissolved in 1,000 gm (1 kg) of
seawater. It is usually expressed as parts perthousand (o/oo) or ppt.  Salinity is an importantproperty of sea water. Salinity of 24.7 o/oo hasbeen considered as the upper limit to
demarcate ‚brackish water™.Factors affecting ocean salinity arementioned below:(i)The salinity of water in the surface layerof  oceans depend mainly on evaporationand precipitation.(ii)Surface salinity is greatly influenced incoastal regions by the fresh water flowfrom rivers, and in polar regions by the
processes of freezing and thawing of ice.(iii)Wind, also influences salinity of an areaby transferring water to other areas.(iv)The ocean currents contribute to thesalinity variations. Salinity, temperature
and density of water are interrelated. Hence,any change in the temperature or density
influences the salinity of water in an area.Figure 13.3 : Thermoclinewarm oceanic water and it is about 500m thickwith temperatures ranging between 20° and25° C. This layer, within the tropical region, ispresent throughout the year but in mid
latitudes it develops only during summer.The second layer called the thermoclinelayer lies below the first layer and is characterisedby rapid decrease in temperature with increasingdepth. The thermocline is 500 -1,000 m thick.
WA
TER (OCEANS)117Red Sea, it is as high as 41o/oo, while in theestuaries and the Arctic, the salinity fluctuatesfrom 0 - 35 o/oo, seasonally. In hot and dryregions, where evaporation is high, the salinitysometimes reaches to 70 o/oo.The salinity variation in the Pacific Oceanis mainly due to its shape and larger areal
extent. Salinity decreases from 35 o/oo  - 31 o/ooon the western parts of the northernhemisphere because of the influx of meltedwater from the Arctic region.  In the same way,
after 15° - 20° south, it decreases to 33 o/oo .The average salinity of the Atlantic Oceanis around 36 o/oo. The highest salinity isrecorded between 15° and 20° latitudes.
Maximum salinity (37 o/oo) is observed between20° N and 30° N and 20° W - 60° W. It graduallydecreases towards the north. The North Sea,
in spite of its location in higher latitudes,records higher salinity due to more saline waterbrought by the North Atlantic Drift. Baltic Sea
records low salinity due to influx of river watersin large quantity. The Mediterranean SeaFigure 13.4 : Spatial pattern of surface temperature (°C) of the oceansTable 13.4 : Dissolved Salts in Sea Water(gm of Salt per kg of Water)Chlorine18.97Sodium10.47Sulphate2.65Magnesium1.28Calcium0.41Potassium0.38Bicarbonate0.14Bromine0.06Borate0.02Strontium0.01Highest salinity in water bodiesLake Van in Turkey (330 o/oo),Dead Sea (238 o/oo),Great Salt Lake (220 o/oo)HORIZONTAL DISTRIBUTION OF SALINITYThe salinity for normal open ocean rangesbetween 33o/oo and 37 o/oo. In the land locked
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY118records higher salinity due to high evaporation.Salinity is, however, very low in Black Sea dueto enormous fresh water influx by rivers. See
the atlas to find out the rivers joining Black Sea.The average salinity of the Indian Ocean is35 o/oo. The low salinity trend is observed inthe Bay of Bengal due to influx of river water.On the contrary, the Arabian Sea shows highersalinity due to high evaporation and low influxof fresh water. Figure 13.5 shows the salinity ofthe World™s oceans.Vertical Distribution of SalinitySalinity changes with depth, but the way itchanges depends upon the location of the sea.Salinity at the surface increases by the loss ofFigure13.5 : Surface salinity of the World™s Oceanswater to ice or evaporation, or decreased by
the input of fresh waters, such as from therivers. Salinity at depth is very much fixed,because there is no way that water is ‚lost™, orthe salt is ‚added.™  There is a marked differencein the salinity between the surface zones and
the deep zones of the oceans.  The lower salinitywater rests above the higher salinity densewater. Salinity, generally, increases with depthand there is a distinct zone called the halocline,where salinity increases sharply. Other factors
being constant, increasing salinity of seawatercauses its density to increase. High salinityseawater, generally, sinks below the lowersalinity water. This leads to stratification bysalinity.EXERCISES1.Multiple choice questions.(i)Identify the element which is not a part of the hydrological cycle
(a) Evaporation(c) Precipitation(b) Hydration(d) Condensation120º60º60º
120º120º60º60º120º
WA
TER (OCEANS)119 (ii)The average depth of continental slope varies between(a) 2-20m(c) 20-200m(b) 200-2,000m(d) 2,000-20,000m(iii)Which one of the following is not a minor relief feature in the oceans:
(a) Seamount(c) Oceanic Deep(b) Atoll(d) Guyot(iv)Salinity is expressed as the amount of salt in grams dissolved in seawater per(a) 10 gm(c) 100 gm(b) 1,000 gm(d) 10,000 gm(v)Which one of the following is the smallest ocean:
(a) Indian Ocean(c) Atlantic Ocean(b) Arctic Ocean(d) Pacific Ocean2.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.(i)Why do we call the earth a Blue Planet?(ii)What is a continental margin?(iii)List out the deepest trenches of various oceans.(iv)What is a thermocline?(v)When you move into the ocean what thermal layers would you encounter?Why the temperature varies with depth?(vi)What is salinity of sea water?3.Answer the following questions in about 150 words.(i)How are various elements of the hydrological cycle interrelated?(ii)Examine the factors that influence the temperature distribution of theoceans.Project Work(i)Consult the atlas and show ocean floor relief on the outline of the world
map.(ii)Identify the areas of mid oceanic ridges from the Indian Ocean.
