Have you ever been to a forest for a picnic?You might have surely gone to a park ifyou live in a city or to a mango, guavaor coconut orchard, if you live in a village. Howdo you differentiate between the natural
vegetation and the planted vegetation? The samevariety may be found growing wild in the forestunder natural conditions and the same treemay be the planted one in your garden underhuman supervision.Natural vegetation refers to a plantcommunity that has been left undisturbed over
a long time, so as to allow its individual species
to adjust themselves to climate and soil
conditions as fully as possible.India is a land of great variety of naturalvegetation. Himalayan heights are marked withtemperate vegetation; the Western Ghats andthe Andaman Nicobar Islands have tropicalrain forests, the deltaic regions have tropical
forests and mangroves; the desert and semi
desert areas of Rajasthan are known for cactii,
a wide variety of bushes and thorny vegetation.
Depending upon the variations in the climate
and the soil, the vegetation of India changes
from one region to another.On the basis of certain common featuressuch as predominant vegetation type and
climatic regions, Indian forests can be divided
into the following groups:TYPES OF FORESTS(i)Tr
opical Evergreen and SemiEvergreen forests(ii)Tr
opical Deciduous forests(iii)Tr
opical Thorn forests(iv)Montane forests(v)Littoral and Swamp forests.Tropical Evergreen andSemi Evergreen ForestsThese forests are found in the western slopeof the Western Ghats, hills of the northeasternregion and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.They are found in warm and humid areas withan annual precipitation of over 200 cm andmean annual temperature above 22oC.Tr
opical evergreen forests are well stratified,with layers closer to the ground and arecovered with shrubs and creepers, with shortstructured trees followed by tall variety of trees.In these forests, trees reach great heights upto 60 m or above. There is no definite time fortrees to shed their leaves, flowering andfruition. As such these forests appear greenall the year round. Species found in theseforests include rosewood, mahogony, aini,ebony, etc.The semi evergreen forests are found in theless rainy parts of these regions. Such forestshave a mixture of evergreen and moistdeciduous trees. The undergrowing climbersprovide an evergreen character to these forests.Main species are white cedar, hollock and kail.NATURAL VEGETATIONCHAPTERFigure 5.1 : Evergreen Forest
58INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTFigure 5.2 : Natural Vegetation
59NATURAL VEGETATIONThe British were aware of the economicvalue of the forests in India, hence, large scaleexploitation of these forests was started. Thestructure of forests was also changed. The oakforests in Garhwal and Kumaon were replacedby pine (chirs) which was needed to lay railwaylines. Forests were also cleared for introducingplantations of tea, rubber and coffee. TheBritish also used timber for constructionactivities as it acts as an insulator of heat. Theprotectional use of forests was, thus, replacedby commercial use.Tropical Deciduous ForestsThese are the most widespread forests in India.They are also called the monsoon forests. Theyspread over regions which receive rainfallbetween 70-200 cm. On the basis of theavailability of water, these forests are furtherdivided into moist and dry deciduous.The Moist deciduous forests are morepronounced in the regions which record rainfallbetween 100-200 cm. These forests are foundin the northeastern states along the foothills ofHimalayas, eastern slopes of the Western Ghatsand Odisha. Teak, sal, shisham, hurra,mahua, amla, semul, kusum, and sandalwoodetc. are the main species of these forests.Dry deciduous forest covers vast areas ofthe country, where rainfall ranges between70 -100 cm. On the wetter margins, it has atransition to the moist deciduous, while on thedrier margins to thorn forests. These forestsare found in rainier areas of the Peninsula andthe plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In thehigher rainfall regions of the Peninsular plateauand the northern Indian plain, these forestshave a parkland landscape with open stretchesin which teak and other trees interspersed withpatches of grass are common. As the dryseason begins, the trees shed their leaves
completely and the forest appears like a vastgrassland with naked trees all around. Tendu,palas, amaltas, bel, khair, axlewood, etc.  arethe common trees of these forests. In thewestern and southern part of Rajasthan,
vegetation cover is very scanty due to lowrainfall and overgrazing.Tropical Thorn ForestsTropical thorn forests occur in the areas whichreceive rainfall less than 50 cm. These consistof a variety of grasses and shrubs. It includessemi-arid areas of south west Punjab,Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradeshand Uttar Pradesh. In these forests, plantsremain leafless for most part of the year and
give an expression of scrub vegetation.Important species found are babool, ber, andwild date palm, khair, neem, khejri, palas, etc.Tussocky grass grows upto a height of 2 m asthe under growth.Montane ForestsIn mountainous areas, the decrease intemperature with increasing altitude leads toa corresponding change in natural vegetation.Mountain forests can be classified into twotypes, the northern mountain forests and the
southern mountain forests.Figure 5.3 : Deciduous ForestsFigure 5.4 : Tropical Thorn Forests
60INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTThe Himalayan ranges show a successionof vegetation from the tropical to the tundra,which change in with the altitude. Deciduousforests are found in the foothills of theHimalayas. It is succeeded by the wettemperate type of forests between an altitudeof 1,000-2,000 m. In the higher hill ranges ofnortheastern India, hilly areas of West Bengaland Uttaranchal, evergreen broad leaf trees
such as oak and chestnut are predominant.Between 1,500-1,750 m, pine forests are alsowell-developed in this zone, with Chir Pine asa very useful commercial tree. Deodar, a highlyvalued endemic species grows mainly in the
western part of the Himalayan range. Deodaris a durable wood mainly used in constructionactivity.  Similarly, the chinar and the walnut,which sustain the famous Kashmirhandicrafts, belong to this zone.  Blue pine andspruce appear at altitudes of 2,225-3,048 m.At many places in this zone, temperate
grasslands are also found. But in the higher
reaches there is a transition to Alpine forestsand pastures. Silver firs, junipers, pines, birch
and rhododendrons, etc. occur between3,000-4,000 m. However, these pastures areused extensively for transhumance by tribeslike the Gujjars, the Bakarwals, the Bhotiyasand the Gaddis. The southern slopes of theHimalayas carry a thicker vegetation coverbecause of relatively higher precipitation than
the drier north-facing slopes. At higheraltitudes, mosses and lichens form part of thetundra vegetation.The southern mountain forests includethe forests found in three distinct areas ofPeninsular India viz; the Western Ghats, theVindhyas and the Nilgiris.  As they are closer
to the tropics, and only 1,500 m above thesea level, vegetation is temperate in the higherregions, and subtropical on the lower regionsof the Western Ghats, especially in Kerala,Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.  The temperate
forests are called Sholas in the Nilgiris,Anaimalai and Palani hills. Some of the other
trees of this forest of economic significanceinclude, magnolia, laurel, cinchona andwattle. Such forests are also found in theSatpura and the Maikal ranges.Littoral and Swamp ForestsIndia has a rich variety of wetland habitats.About 70 per cent of this comprises areasunder paddy cultivation.  The total area of wetland is 3.9 million hectares.  Two sites ŠChilika Lake (Odisha) and Keoladeo National
Park (Bharatpur) are protected as water-fowlhabitats under the Convention of Wetlands ofInternational Importance (Ramsar Convention).An international convention is an
agreement among member states of
the United Nations.The country™s wetlands have been groupedinto eight categories, viz.  (i) the reservoirs of theDeccan Plateau in the south together with thelagoons and  other wetlands of the southernwest coast; (ii) the vast saline expanses of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and the Gulf of Kachchh;
(iii) freshwater lakes and reservoirs from Gujarat
eastwards through Rajasthan (KeoladeoNational Park) and Madhya Pradesh; (iv) thedelta wetlands and lagoons of India™s east coast
(Chilika Lake); (v) the freshwater marshes of the
Gangetic Plain; (vi) the floodplains of the
Brahmaputra; the marshes and swamps in thehills of northeast India and the Himalayanfoothills; (vii) the lakes and rivers of the montane
region of Kashmir and Ladakh; and (viii) the
mangrove forest and other wetlands of the island
arcs of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.Mangroves  grow along the coasts in the saltmarshes, tidal creeks, mud flats and estuaries.Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests
61NATURAL VEGETATIONThey consist of a number of salt-tolerant speciesof plants.  Crisscrossed by creeks of stagnantwater and tidal flows, these forests give shelterto a wide variety of birds.In India, the mangrove forests spread over6,740 sq. km which is 7 per cent of the world™smangrove forests. They are highly developed inthe Andaman and Nicobar Islands and theSunderbans of West Bengal. Other areas ofsignificance are the Mahanadi, the Godavari andthe Krishna deltas.  These forests too, are being
encroached upon, and hence, need conservation.FOREST COVER IN INDIAAccording to state records, the forest areacovers  23.28 per cent of the total land area of
the country.  It is important to note that the
forest area and the actual forest cover are not
the same.  The forest area is the area notifiedand recorded as the forest land irrespective ofthe existence of trees, while the actual forest
cover is the area occupied by forests with
canopy.  The former is based on the records of
the State Revenue Department, while the latteris based on aerial photographs and satelliteimageries.  According to India State of Forest
Report 2011, the actual forest cover in India is
only 21.05 per cent. Of the forest cover, theshare of dense and open forests are 12.29 and8.75 per cent respectively.Both forest area and forest cover vary fromstate to state.  Lakshadweep has zero per centforest area; Andaman and Nicobar Islands have
86.93 per cent.  Most of the states with less than10 per cent of the forest area lie in the north andnorthwestern part of the country.  These are
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi.Most of the forests in Punjab and Haryana have
been cleared for cultivation.  States with 10-20per cent forest area are Tamil Nadu and WestBengal. In Peninsular India, excluding TamilNadu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, the areaunder forest cover is 20-30 per cent.  Thenortheastern states have more than 30 per centof the land under forest. Hilly topography andheavy rainfall are good for forest growth.There is a lot of variation in actual forest cover,which ranges from 9.56 per cent in Jammu and
Kashmir to 84.01 per cent in Andaman andNicobar Islands.  From the table showing thedistribution of forests in India (Appendix IV), it isclear that there are 15 states where the forest cover
is more than one-third of the total area, which is
the basic requirement for maintaining theecological balance.On the basis of the percentage of the actualforest cover, the states have been grouped intofour regions:The RegionPercentageCover of theForest(i)The region of high concentration> 40(ii)The region of medium concentration20-40(iii)The region of low concentration10-20(iv)The region of very low concentration< 10Taking the data from Appendix IV, list the states underthe four regins of forest coverFOREST CONSERVATIONForests have an intricate interrelationship withlife and environment. These provide numerousdirect and indirect advantages to our economyand society. Hence, conservation of forest is ofvital importance to the survival and prosperity
of humankind. Accordingly, the Governmentof India proposed to have a nation-wide forestconservation policy, and adopted a forestpolicy in 1952, which was further modified in1988. According to the new forest policy, the
Government will emphasise sustainable forestmanagement in order to conserve and expandforest reserve on the one hand, and to meetthe needs of local people on the other.The forest policy aimed at : (i) bringing 33per cent of the geographical areas under forestFigure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests
62INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTcover;  (ii) maintaining environmental stabilityand to restore forests where ecological balancewas disturbed; (iii) conserving the naturalheritage of the country, its biological diversity
and genetic pool; (iv) checks soil erosion,extension of the desert lands and reduction of
floods and droughts; (v) increasing the forestcover through social forestry and afforestationon degraded land; (vi) increasing theproductivity of forests to make timber, fuel,fodder and food available to rural populationdependant on forests, and encourage the
substitution of wood; (vii)  creating of a massivepeoples movement involving women to
encourage planting of trees, stop felling of treesand thus, reduce pressure on the existing forest.Forests and LifeTo a vast number of tribal people, theforest is a home, a livelihood, theirvery existence. It provides them food,
fruits of all kinds, edible leaves, honey,nourishing roots and wild game. Itprovides them with material to buildtheir houses and items for practisingtheir arts. The importance of forests
in tribal economy is well-known asthey are the source of sustenance andlivelihood for tribal communities. It iscommonly believed that the tribalcommunities live in harmony with
nature and protect forests. Out of atotal of 593 districts 188 have beenidentified as tribal districts. The tribaldistricts account for about 59.61 percent of the total forest cover of the
country whereas the geographicalarea of 188 tribal districts formsonly 33.63 per cent of the totalgeographical area of the country. Itdemonstrates that tribal districts are
generally rich in forest cover.Forest and tribals are very closelyrelated. The age-old knowledge oftribals regarding forestry can be usedin the development of forests. Rather
than treating tribals as minor forestproduce collectors they should bemade growers of minor forest produceand encouraged to participate inconservation.Based on the forest conservation policy thefollowing steps were initiated:Social ForestrySocial forestry means the management andprotection of forests and afforestation on barren
lands with the purpose of helping in theenvironmental, social and rural development.The National Commission on Agriculture(1976) has classified social forestry into three
categories. These are Urban forestry, Rural
forestry and Farm forestry.Urban forestry pertains to the raising andmanagement of trees on public and privately
owned lands in and around urban centres
such as green belts, parks, roadside avenues,
industrial and commercial green belts, etc.Rural forestry lays emphasis on promotionof agro-forestry and community-forestry.Agro-forestry is the raising of trees andagriculture crops  on the same land inclusive
of the waste patches. It combines forestry with
agriculture, thus, altering the simultaneous
production of food, fodder, fuel, timber andfruit. Community forestry involves the raising
of trees on public or community land such as
the village pasture  and  temple land, roadside,
canal bank, strips along railway lines, and
schools etc. Community forestry programme
aims at providing benefits to the community
as a whole. Community forestry provides a
means under which the people of landless
classes can associate themselves in tree-
raising and thus, get those benefits whichotherwise are restricted for landowners.Farm ForestryFarm forestry is a term applied to the processunder which farmers grow  trees for
commercial and non-commercial purposes on
their farm lands.Forest departments of various statesdistribute seedlings of trees free of cost to
small and medium farmers. Several lands
such as the margins of agricultural fields,grasslands and pastures, land around homesand cow sheds may be used for raising trees
under non-commercial farm forestry.
63NATURAL VEGETATIONWILDLIFEYou would have visited a zoo and may have seenanimals and birds in captivity. Wildlife of Indiais a great natural heritage. It is estimated that
about 4-5 per cent of all known plant andanimal species on the earth are found in India.The main reason for this remarkable diversityof life forms is the great diversity of the ecosystemwhich this country has preserved and
supported through the ages.  Over the years,their habitat has been disturbed by  humanactivities and as a result, their numbers havedwindled significantly. There are certain speciesthat are at the brink of extinction.Some of the important reasons of thedeclining of wildlife are as follows:(i)Industrial and technological advancementbrought about a rapid increase in theexploitation of forest resources.(ii)More and more lands were cleared foragriculture, human settlement, roads,mining, reservoirs, etc.(iii)Pressure on forests mounted due to
lopping for fodder and fuelwood and
removal of small timber by the local people.(iv)Grazing  by domestic cattle caused an
adverse effect on wildlife and its habitat.(v)Hunting was taken up as a sport by the
elite and  hundreds of wild animals were
killed in a single hunt. Now commercialpoaching is rampant.(vi)Incidence of forest fire.It is being felt that conservation of wildlife isof great significance to the national as well asthe world heritage along with the promotion ofecotourism. What steps have been initiated bythe government in this direction?WILDLIFE CONSERVATION IN INDIAThe protection of wildlife has a long tradition inIndia. Many stories of Panchtantra and JungleBooks, etc. have stood the test of time relatingto the love for wildlife. These have a profound
impact on young minds.In 1972, a comprehensive Wildlife Act wasenacted, which provides the main legalframework for conservation and protection of
wildlife in India. The two main objectives of theAct are; to provide protection to the endangered
species listed in the schedule of the Act and to
provide legal support to the conservation areasof the country classified as National parks,sanctuaries and closed areas. This Act has beencomprehensively amended in 1991, makingpunishments more stringent and has also made
provisions for the protection of specified plantspecies and conservation of endangered speciesof wild animals.There are 102 National parks and 515wildlife sanctuaries covering an area of 15.67
million hectares in the country.Wildlife conservation has a very large ambitwith unbounded potential for the well-being ofhumankind. However, this can be achieved onlywhen every individual understands itssignificance and contributes his bit.For the purpose of effective conservation offlora and fauna, special steps have been initiatedby the Government of India in collaboration withUNESCO™s ‚Man and Biosphere Programme™.Special schemes like Project Tiger (1973)and Project Elephant (1992) have been
launched to conserve these species and theirhabitat in a sustainable manner.Project Tiger has been implemented since1973. The main objective of the scheme is to
ensure maintenance of viable population oftigers in India for scientific, aesthetic, culturaland ecological values, and to preserve areas ofbiological importance as natural heritage for the
benefit, education and enjoyment of the people.Initially, the Project Tiger was launched in ninetiger reserves, covering an area of 16,339 sq. km,
which has now increased to 44 tiger reserves,encompassing 36,988.28 sq. km of core tigerhabitats distributed in 17 states. The tigerpopulation in the country has registered an
increase from 1,411 in 2006 to 1,706 in 2010.Project Elephant was launched in 1992 toassist states having free ranging population ofwild elephants. It was aimed at ensuring long-term survival of identified viable populationof elephants in their natural habitat. Theproject is being implemented in 17 states.Apart from this, some other projects suchas Crocodile Breeding Project, Project Hangul
and conservation of Himalayan Musk deer have
also been launched by the Government of India.
64INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTFigure 5.8 : Objectives of a Biosphere ReserveBIOSPHERE RESERVESA Biosphere Reserve is a unique andrepresentative ecosystem of terrestrial and
coastal areas which are internationallyrecognised within the framework of UNESCO™sMan and Biosphere (MAB) Programme. TheBiosphere Reserve aims at achieving the three
objectives as depicted in Figure 5.8.There are 18 Biosphere Reserves in India(Table 5.1, Figure 5.9). Ten Biosphere ReservesFigure 5.7 : Elephants in their Natural HabitatTable 5.1 : List of Biosphere Reserves* Sites with bold letters have been included in the World Network of BRs of UNESCO.Source : Annual Report 2013-14, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India.Sl.Name of the BiosphereDate ofLocation in the States/UTNo.Reserve and TotalDesignationGeographical Area (km2)1.Nilgiri (5520)01.08.1986Part of Wynad, Nagarhole, Bandipur and Madumalai, Nilambur,Silent Valley and Siruvani Hills (Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka).2.Nanda Devi (5860.69)18.01.1988Part of Chamoli, Pithoragarh and Almora Districts in Uttarakhand.3.Nokrek (820)01.09.1988Part of East, West and South Garo Hill Districts in Meghalaya.4.Manas (2837)14.03.1989Part of Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Barpeta, Nalbari, Kamrup andDarang Districts in Assam5.Sunderban (9630)29.03.1989Part of delta of Ganges and Brahamaputra river system in WestBengal.6.Gulf of Mannar (10500)18.02.1989Indian part of Gulf of Mannar extending from Rameswaram islandin the North to Kaniyakumari in the South of Tamil Nadu.7.Great Nicobar (885)06.01.1989Southern most island of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.8.Similipal (4374)21.06.1994Part of Mayurbhanj District in Odisha.9.Dibru-Saikhowa (765)28.07.1997Part of Dibrugarh and Tinsukia Districts in Assam10Dehang Debang (5111.5)02.09.1998Part of Upper Siang, West Siang and Dibang Valley Districts inArunachal Pradesh.11.Pachmarhi (4981.72)03.03.1999Part of Betul, Hoshangabad and Chhindwara Districts in MadhyaPradesh.12.Khangchendzonga (2619.92)07.02.2000Part of North and West Districts in Sikkim13.Agasthyamalai (3500.36)12.11.2001Part of Thirunelveli and Kanyakumari Districts in Tamil Nadu
and Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam and Pathanmthitta districtsin Kerala.14.Achanakmar-Amarkantak30.03.2005Part of Anuppur and Dindori Districts of Madhya Pradesh(3835.51)and Bilaspur district of Chhattisgarh15.Kachchh (12,454)29.01.2008Part of Kachchh, Rajkot, Surendranagar and Patan Districts in
Gujarat.16.Cold Desert (7770)28.08.2009Pin Valley National Park and surroundings; Chandratal andSarchu and Kibber Wildlife sanctuary in Himachal Pradesh.17.Seshachalam (4755.997)20.09.2010Seshachalam hill ranges in Eastern Ghatsencompassing part ofChittoor and Kadapa Districts in Andhra Pradesh.18.Panna (2998.98)25.08.2011Part of Pann and Chhattarpur Districts in Madhya Pradesh.
65NATURAL VEGETATIONFigure 5.9 : India : Biosphere Reserves
66INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENTEXERCISEShave been recognised by the UNESCO on WorldNetwork of  Biosphere Reserves.Nilgiri Biosphere ReserveThe Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (NBR), the firstof the fourteen biosphere reserves of India, wasestablished in September 1986. It embracesthe sanctuary complex of Wyanad, Nagarhole,Bandipur and Mudumalai, the entire forestedhill slopes of Nilambur, the Upper Nilgiriplateau, Silent Valley and the Siruvani hills.The total area of the biosphere reserve isaround 5,520 sq. km.The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve possessesdifferent habitat types, unspoilt areas ofnatural vegetation types with several dryscrubs, dry and moist deciduous, semi-evergreen and wet evergreen forests, evergreensholas, grasslands and swamps. It includesthe largest known population of two
endangered animal species, namely the NilgiriTahr and the Lion-tailed macaque. The largestsouth Indian population of elephant, tiger,gaur, sambar and chital as well as a goodnumber of endemic and endangered plants arealso found in this reserve. The habitat of anumber of tribal groups remarkable for theirtraditional modes of harmonious use of theenvironment are also found here.The topography of the NBR is extremelyvaried, ranging from an altitude of 250 m to2,650 m. About 80 per cent of the floweringplants reported from the Western Ghats occurin the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve.Nanda Devi Biosphere ReserveThe Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve situatedin Uttarakhand includes parts of Chamoli,Almora, Pithoragarh and Bageshwar districts.The major forest types of the reserve aretemperate. A few important species are silver
weed and orchids like latifolie andrhododendron.  The biosphere reserve has arich fauna, for example the snow leopard,black bear, brown bear, musk deer, snow-cock, golden eagle and black eagle.Major threats to the ecosystem are  thecollection of endangered plants for medicinal
use, forest fires and poaching.Sunderbans Biosphere ReserveIt is located in the swampy delta of the riverGanga in West Bengal. It extends over a vastarea of  9,630 sq. km and consists of mangroveforests, swamps and forested islands.
Sunderbans is the home of nearly 200 Royal
Bengal tigers.The tangled mass of roots of mangrovetrees provide safe homes for a large number
of species, from fish to shrimp. More than 170
birds species are known to inhabit thesemangrove forests.Adapting itself to the saline and fresh waterenvironment, the tigers at the park are goodswimmers, and they hunt scarce preys such
as chital deer, barking deer, wild pig and evenmacaques. In the Sunderbans, the mangrove
forests are characterised by Heritiera fomes,
a species valued for its timber.Gulf of Mannar Biosphere ReserveThe Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve coversan area of 105,000 hectares on the southeast
coast of India. It is one of the world™s richest
regions from a marine biodiversity perspective.
The biosphere reserve comprises 21 islands
with estuaries, beaches, forests of the
nearshore environment, sea grasses, coral
reefs, salt marshes and mangroves. Among the
Gulf™™s 3,600 plant and animal species are theglobally endangered e.g. sea cow (Dugongdugon). Besides six mangrove species, endemic
to Peninsular India are also endangered.1.Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.(i)Sandalwood is an example of:(a)Evergreen forest(c)Deltaic forest(b)Deciduous forest(d)Thorny forest
67NATURAL VEGETATION(ii)Which one of the following was the purpose of Project Tiger?(a)to kill tigers(c)to protect tigers from illegal hunting(b)to put tigers in the Zoo(d)to make films on tigers(iii)In which one of the following  states is the Nandadevi Biosphere reservesituated?(a)Bihar(c)Uttarakhand(b)Uttar Pradesh(d)Odisha(iv)How many of the Biosphere reserves from India are recognised by theUNESCO?(a)One(c)Three(b)Two(d)Four(v)Which one of the following proportion of area of the country was targetedto be under forest in Forest Policy of India?(a)33(c)55(b)44(d)222.Answer the following questions in about 30 words.(i)What is natural vegetation? Under what climatic conditions are tropicalevergreen forests develop?(ii)What do you understand by social forestry?(iii)Define Biosphere reserves?(iv)What is the difference between forest area and forest cover?3.Answer the following questions in not more than 150 words.(i)What steps have been taken up to conserve forests?(ii)How can people™s participation be effective in conserving forests and wildlife?Project/Activity
1.On the outline map of India, mark and label the following.(i)Areas having Mangrove forests.(ii)Biosphere reserves of Nanda Devi, Sunderbans, Gulf of Mannar and Nilgiri.(iii)Mark the location of Forest Survey of India Head Quarter.2.List the trees, bush and shrub species found around your school. Writetheir local names and their uses.
