26Practical Work in Geography
Chapter 3Latitude, Longitude andTime
THE EARTH is nearly a sphere. It is because of the fact that the
equatorial radius and the polar radius of the earth is not the same.The rotation of the earth over its axis produces bulging at the equator.
Hence, the actual shape resembles that of an oblate spheroid. The
shape of the earth presents some difficulties in positioning its surface
features, as there is no point of reference from which to measure the
relative positions of other points. Hence, a network of imaginary lines

is drawn on a globe or a map to locate various places. Let us find outwhat are these lines and how are  they drawn.The spinning of the earth on its axis from west to east provides
two natural points of reference, i.e. North and South Poles. They form

the basis for the geographical grid. A network of intersecting lines isdrawn for the purpose of fixing the locations of different features.
The grid consists of two sets of horizontal and vertical lines, whichare called parallels of latitudes and the meridians of longitudes.Horizontal lines are drawn parallel to each other in east-westdirection. The line drawn midway between the North Pole and the
South Pole is called the equator. It is the largest circle and divides
the globe into two equal halves. It is also called a great circle
. All theother parallels get smaller in size, in proportion to their distancefrom
 the equator towards the poles and divide the earth into two
unequal halves, also referred to as the small circles. These imaginary
lines running east-west are commonly known as the parallels oflatitude.The vertical lines running north-south, join the two poles. Theyare called the meridians of longitude. They are spaced farthest apart
at the equator and converge at a point at each pole.
27Latitude, Longitude and Time
GlossaryParallels of Latitude : The parallels of latitude refer to the angular
distance, in degrees, minutes and seconds of a point north or south ofthe Equator. Lines of latitude are often referred to as parallels.
Meridians of Longitude : The meridians of longitude refer to the angulardistance, in degrees, minutes, and seconds, of a point east or west ofthe Prime (Greenwich
) Meridian. Lines of longitude are 
often referred to
as meridians.The latitudes and longitudes are commonly referred to as geographical
coordinates as they provide systematic network of lines upon which the
position of various surface features of the earth, can be represented.
With the help of these coordinates, location, distance and direction of
various points can be easily determined.
Although an infinite number of parallels and meridians may be drawnon a globe, only a selected number of them are usually drawn on a map.
Latitudes and longitudes are measured in degrees (°) because they
represent angular distances. Each degree is further divided into 60
minutes ( ‚ ) and each minute into 60 seconds ( ﬁ ).PARALLELS OF LATITUDES
The latitude of a place on the earth™s surface is its distance north or
south of the equator, measured along the meridian of that place as an
angle from the centre of the earth. Lines joining places with the same
latitudes are called parallels. The value of equator is 0° and the latitudeof the poles are 90°N and 90°S (Fig. 3.1 on the next page). If parallels oflatitude are drawn at an interval of one degree, there will be 89 parallels

in the northern and the southern hemispheres each. The total number
of parallels thus drawn, including the equator, will be 179. Depending
upon the location of a feature or a place north or south of the equator,

the letter N or S is written along with the value of the latitude.If the earth were a perfect sphere, the length of 1
0 of latitude (a onedegree arc of a meridian) would be a constant value, i.e. 111 km
everywhere on the earth. This length is almost the same as that of a
