60H
ORNBILL7.  The Adventure
Jayant NarlikarNotice these expressions in the text.Infer their meaning from the context.blow-by-blow accountde factomorale boosterastuterelegated todoctored accountspolitical acumengave vent toTHE Jijamata Express sped along the Pune-Bombay* routeconsiderably faster than the Deccan Queen. There were noindustrial townships outside Pune. The first stop, Lonavala, came
in 40 minutes. The ghat section that followed was no different
from what he knew. The train stopped at Karjat only briefly and
went on at even greater speed. It roared through Kalyan.Meanwhile, the racing mind of Professor Gaitonde had arrivedat a plan of action in Bombay. Indeed, as a historian he felt heshould have thought of it sooner. He would go to a big library

and browse through history books. That was the surest way of
finding out how the present state of affairs was reached. He also
planned eventually to return to Pune and have a long talk with
Rajendra Deshpande, who would surely help him understand
what had happened.That is, assuming that in this world there existed someonecalled Rajendra Deshpande!The train stopped beyond the long tunnel. It was a small stationcalled Sarhad. An Anglo-Indian in uniform went through the trainchecking permits.The present story is an adapted version. The original text of the story can beconsulted on the NCERT website : www.ncert.nic.in
*Now known as Mumbai

THE ADVENTURE61ﬁThis is where the British Raj begins. You are going for the
first time, I presume?ﬂ Khan Sahib asked.ﬁYes.ﬂ The reply was factually correct. Gangadharpant had
not been to this Bombay before. He ventured a question: ﬁAnd,
Khan Sahib, how will you go to Peshawar?ﬂﬁThis train goes to the Victoria Terminus*. I will take the
Frontier Mail tonight out of Central.ﬂ
ﬁHow far does it go? By what route?ﬂ
ﬁBombay to Delhi, then to Lahore and then Peshawar. A long
journey. I will reach Peshawar the day after tomorrow.ﬂ
Thereafter, Khan Sahib spoke a lot about his business and
Gangadharpant was a willing listener. For, in that way, he was

able to get some flavour of life in this India that was so different.
The train now passed through the suburban rail traffic. The
blue carriages carried the letters, GBMR, on the side.ﬁGreater Bombay Metropolitan Railway,ﬂ explained Khan
Sahib. ﬁSee the tiny Union Jack painted on each carriage? A
gentle reminder that we are in British territory.ﬂ
The train began to slow down beyond Dadar and stoppedonly at its destination, Victoria Terminus. The station looked

remarkably neat and clean. The staff was mostly made up of

Anglo-Indians and Parsees along with a handful of British officers.
As he emerged from the station, Gangadharpant found
himself facing an imposing building. The letters on it proclaimed

its identity to those who did not know this Bombay landmark:EAST INDIA HOUSE HEADQUARTERS
 OFTHE EAST INDIA COMPANYPrepared as he was for many shocks, Professor Gaitonde had not
expected this. The East India Company had been wound up shortly
after the events of 1857 Š at least, that is what history books said.
Yet, here it was, not only alive but flourishing. So, history had
taken a different turn, perhaps before 1857. How and when had it

happened? He had to find out.As he walked along Hornby Road, as it was called, he found
a different set of shops and office buildings. There was no
Handloom House building. Instead, there were Boots and
Woolworth departmental stores, imposing offices of Lloyds,

Barclays and other British banks, as in a typical high street of a
town in England.*Now known as Chattrapati Shivaji Terminus

