94H
ORNBILL2.  SummarisingSUMMARISING follows note-making. The purpose of note-making isusually for one™s own personal reference. If the main points are
to be reported we present a summary. It is not as severely
shortened as note-making.Summarising is the selection and paraphrasing of allimportant information of the original source. This is done by
analysing the paragraphs/passage in order to formulate a plan

of writing.The process of summarising would involve the steps followed
in note-making:1.underlining important ideas

2.writing them down, abridging the verbs

3.avoiding examples, explanations, repetition.
However, instead of nominalising the points (changing
verbs into nouns), we expand the points into full sentencesand link them using suitable connectors. We need to be

precise in our expression. The summary will contain all the

main ideas of the original. Practice in using one word for
many will help.For example:Children 
who show intelligence far beyond their age oftenturn out to be mediocre in adult life.
orPrecocious
 children often turn out to be mediocre in
adult life.Her genius was marked by excellence in the various arts,languages and science.orShe was a versatile genius.
SUMMARISING95Now read the following text underlining important words as you
go along.Soybeans belong to the legume family. The beans are the seeds
of the leguminous soybean plant. They can be grown on a

variety of soils and in a wide range of climates. Soybeans are

versatile as they can be used as whole beans, soy sprouts, or

processed as a variety of food items, such as soy milk, tofu,

tempeh, textured vegetable protein, miso, soy sauce, soy oil
and margarine, and soy dairy alternatives. 
They are also usedfor making candles and bio-diesel.Soy is an excellent source of high quality protein; is
low in saturated fats and is cholestrol-free. It is also rich

in vitamins, especially Vitamin B complex, minerals such
as magnesium, calcium, iron, potassium and copper and
also fibres. In recent times it has been highly

recommended because of its ability to lower the levels of

Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL), a bad cholesterol. The

Food and Drug Administration (FDA), has confirmed that

foods containing soy protein are likely to reduce the risk

of coronary heart disease.
An easy way to take soy is as soymilk now available withadded flavour. Soymilk does not contain lactose (milk sugar)

and can be drunk by those who are allergic to normal milk.

To get soymilk, soybeans are soaked in water, ground and

then strained. If you don™t mind the trouble, you can also

make it at home. (225 words).Now note down the important points.Soybeans are the seeds of the soybean plant of the legume
family.They grow in a variety of soils and climates.
They can be used in various forms Š beans, sprouts and a

variety of food items.They are also used to make candles and bio-diesel.
They are a source of high quality protein, vitamins, minerals

and fibres. They are low in fat content and cholesterol. They

can lower LDL levels and reduces risk of coronary heart
disease.Soymilk, lactose-free, is available as flavoured milk and can
be drunk by those allergic to ordinary milk and can also be

96H
ORNBILLmade at home by soaking the beans, grinding them andstraining the water. (111 words)
A summary is usually one-third the length of the original
passage. This is about half.Now think of what we can omit to make the summary more briefas shown below.The soybean leguminous plant which grows in all kinds of
soil and climate yields beans, sprouts and a variety of

processed food items and  dairy alternatives and is also used

to make candles and bio-diesel.Rich in protein, vitamins, minerals and fibres, it has a
low fat and cholesterol content. It lowers LDL levels and

reduces the risk of coronary heart disease.
Soymilk which is lactose-free is available as flavouredmilk and agrees with people allergic to ordinary milk. It

can be made at home by soaking, grinding and straining
soybean. (90 words)
Try reducing it further to about 72 words.
Soybean, a legume, growing in a variety of soil and climatic

conditions, yields beans, sprouts and a variety of food items

and is used in making candles and bio-diesel.Rich in protein, vitamins, minerals and fibres, it is low in
cholesterol and fat. It lowers LDL levels and reduces the risk

of coronary heart disease. Soymilk, lactose-free, is available

flavoured and taken by people allergic to milk. It can also be
made at home. (74 words)Notice that we have phrases in apposition: ‚a legume™, between
commas; present participles: ‚growing™ to effect reduction. Instead

of ‚it is rich in–™ we have used ‚rich in–™ and postponed the main
verb in the sentence. Almost all the main points have been covered.
Read the text below and summarise it.Green SaharaThe Great Desert Where Hippos Once Wallowed
The Sahara sets a standard for dry land. It™s the world™slargest desert. Relative humidity can drop into the low single
digits. There are places where it rains only about once a

SUMMARISING97century. There are people who reach the end of their lives
without ever seeing water come from the sky.
Yet beneath the Sahara are vast aquifers of fresh water,
enough liquid to fill a small sea. It is fossil water, a treasure
laid down in prehistoric times, some of it possibly a million
years old. Just 6,000 years ago, the Sahara was a much
different place.
It was green. Prehistoric rock art in the Sahara shows
something surprising: hippopotamuses, which needyear-round water.
ﬁWe don™t have much evidence of a tropical paradise out
there, but we had something perfectly liveable,ﬂ says Jennifer

Smith, a geologist at Washington University in St Louis.
The green Sahara was the product of the migration of
the paleo-monsoon. In the same way that ice ages come and
go, so too do monsoons migrate north and south. The
dynamics of earth™s motion are responsible. The tilt of the
earth™s axis varies in a regular cycle Š sometimes the planet

is more tilted towards the sun, sometimes less so. The axis

also wobbles like a spinning top. The date of the earth™s
perihelion Š its closest approach to the sun Š varies in a

cycle as well.At times when the Northern Hemisphere tilts sharply
towards the sun and the planet makes its closest approach,

the increased blast of sunlight during the north™s summer
months can cause the African monsoon (which currently

occurs between the Equator and roughly 17
0N latitude) toshift to the north as it did 10,000 years ago, inundatingNorth Africa.Around 5,000 years ago the monsoon shifted dramatically
southward again. The prehistoric inhabitants of the Sahara
discovered that their relatively green surroundings were

undergoing something worse than a drought (and perhaps

they migrated towards the Nile Valley, where Egyptian culture
began to flourish at around the same time).
ﬁWe™re learning, and only in recent years, that some
climate changes in the past have been as rapid as anything
underway today,ﬂ says Robert Giegengack, a University of
Pennsylvania geologist.As the land dried out and vegetation decreased, the soil
lost its ability to hold water when it did rain. Fewer clouds
