LETTER-WRITING1075.  Letter-writingLETTER-WRITING is an important channel of communication
between people who are geographically distant from one

another. In earlier times when the telephone and e-mail were
not available, the only means of communication between peoplewas through letters.
Letter-writing is a skill that has to be developed. In general
there are two types of letters: formal, that are written to convey
official business and information and informal, which are

personal letters to communicate with friends and family. Formal
letters are sent out when we need to write to various publicbodies or agencies for our requirements in civic life. For example,

we might have to ask for a certificate or to inform a change in

our address. A letter  is usually one in a series of exchanges
between two people or parties.Formal Letters
Let  us now examine some of the steps in writing formal letters.
1.(i)
Introducing oneself if it is the first time you are writing
(ii)Referring to an earlier letter if you are responding to it.
2.Stating the purpose of the letter3.(i)
Stating action/information required from the addressee
(ii)Explaining action taken/supplying information
4.(i)
Urging  action to be taken
(ii)Offering assistance in future
This is the basic structure of a letter.  It will have to be
modified according to the purpose for which it is written and
the person to whom it is addressed.

108H
ORNBILLWhen you write a letter you should keep in mind the following points.1.Purpose2.Person to whom it is addressed
3.Tone you should adopt
4.Completeness of  the message
5.Action required
6.Conciseness of expression
We have so far considered the content of letters. A letter also
has a typical format.
1.Name and address of sender
Companies have printed letterheads with the name of the
company printed on them. A letterhead may also carry the

name and designation of persons in responsible positions.2.Name and address of addressee
3.Date4.Mode of address or salutation
Salutation is the mode of addressing a person. We may have
the following forms.
(i)Dear Sir/Madam (when we are writing to a total stranger
whom we do not know at all).(ii)Dear Mr/Ms/Dr/Professor + Surname as in: Dear Dr
Sinha, (when it is a formal relationship with the

addressee and the writer does not know him or her

personally).(iii)Dear Su
jata (when the writer knows the addressee
personally and the two share a semi-formal relationship).
5.Reference to previous correspondence, if any.
Most official letters carry a subject line just above the
salutation. This is for quick reference to the subject.
6.Content of letterThe content of the letter begins on the next line and isarranged in two or three paragraphs.
7.Complimentary close and signature
Letters usually end politely with the following phrases:Thank you, With regards, With best wishes, Hope to see

LETTER-WRITING109you soon, Hope to receive an early reply etc. The
complimentary close is followed by ‚Yours sincerely/ Yours

truly™, and the writer™s signature in 
the next line.Given below is an example of the format of a formal letter.
Ritu PatelManager, Customer Services

Vijayanagar Gas Company

121, Ameerpet
Hyderabad 500 01612 November 2005Mr Shagun Thomas801, Vijay Apartments

Begumpet
Hyderabad 500 016Sub: Your application No. F323 for a new gas connection

Dear Mr Thomas,ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠWith regards,
Yours sincerely,

Ritu PatelNowadays all the parts of a letter are aligned on the left. This
style is called the Full-Block style.The date and signature are very important in letters.
We do not use commas after every line in the address.

110H
ORNBILLDo not begin your letters with hackneyed expressions like,
‚With reference to your letter dated 10 January™. Instead,

use personalised variations like, ‚I was glad to receive your
letter of 10 January–™ or ‚We were happy to note from your
letter that the goods have reached you safely–
™Never end your letters with hanging participles like ‚Thankingyou™ or ‚Awaiting your reply™. Instead write, ‚Thank you™ or
‚We/I await/look forward to your reply™.
Informal Letters
Informal letters include personal letters. If it is a personal letter
the format is flexible. We might just write the name of our city on
top, followed by the date.Hyderabad12 November 2005Dear Sujata,ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ
ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠBye,Yours affectionately/With love/
All the best/Take care etc.
(Signature)

LETTER-WRITING111The flexible format of the informal letter may also be used to
seek information from concerned authorities. Given below is

an example.179 NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 0169 September 2005The ManagerHimachal Tourism

Mall Road
ShimlaDear Sir,
We are planning to spend our vacation in Dharamsala,
Himachal Pradesh during Dussehra and would like someinformation regarding availability of lodging in the area.
We would like to have information about inexpensive
hotels in and around 
Dharamsala. Could you pleasesend me a city map and brochures about the activities

and sights in the city?Thank you.Yours faithfully,
(Suryadhan Kumar)Given below is the format of the informal letter.
Your address (but not your name) usually goes in the top right-
hand corner, but may  go on the left too.
The name and/or job title (if you know them) and the address

of the person you are writing to goes on the left.

112H
ORNBILLTo address someone whose name you do not know you
can write: 
Dear Sir, Dear Madam, Dear Sirs, Dear Sir/Madam.
To address someone by name, use their title and surname
e.g. Dear Dr Balakrishnan.To end a letter, use ‚Yours sincerely™, if you have addressed

the person by name; ‚Yours faithfully™, if you have begun
the letter with ‚Dear Sir™ or ‚Madam™, etc.
Job ApplicationAt some point of time each one of us will have to apply for a job.Job applications are usually written in response to

advertisements.Let us take this sample advertisement from a  daily newspaper,
The Hindu dated 15 November 2005.
Come–join the ADVENTURECustomer Support ExecutivesGraduate/Diploma holderswith/without experiencepossessing good Customer
Service skills. Excellent spokenand written communicationskills in English is a must.Send in your applications withyour resume and passport
size photograph to:WONDERLANDCOMMUNICATIONS,SOUTH STREET,  SALEM,
TAMIL NADULet us assume that you have a degree or a diploma and are
applying for the job. We need to prepare a resume, which actually

means a summary of particulars relating to your background,

academic qualifications and experience, if any. Other terms used

for ‚resume™ are ‚curriculum vitae™ and ‚biodata™.

LETTER-WRITING113The general format of a resume or curriculum vitae is
shown below.CURRICULUM VITAE
Name:
Address:

Telephone Number:

E-mail ID:

Date of birth:

Academic Qualifications:
ExaminationBoard/SubjectsYearDivision
UniversityS.S.CDiploma in–
Degree in–
Experience:(Begin from present
employment)Skills:
Languages known:
Hobbies and Interests:

Achievements:
References:
(names of people in positionslike your school Prinicipal who
can certify your character and
conduct)
114H
ORNBILLNow we need to send a covering letter along with the curriculumvitae. The following letter is an example.Your name and address
DateThe ManagerHuman Resource Division

Wonderland Communications
South Street, SalemTamil Nadu
Dear Sir,
I would like to apply for the post of Customer SupportExecutive that you have advertised in The Hindu of 15
November 2005.
I have just completed my Diploma in Communicationfrom the State Polytechnic. I was happy to note that you

do not insist on experience.If selected, this would be my first job. I am a sincere,
honest and hardworking person. I am friendly and
outgoing and have good communication skills.I am enclosing my resume and look forward to meeting
you in person.Regards,
Yours truly,
(Signature)
Activities1.You have not received your Roll Number card for the Class
XII examination. Write a letter to the Registrar, Examination

Branch, CBSE asking for it.
LETTER-WRITING1152.Write a letter to the President, Residents™ Welfare Association
of your locality suggesting some measures that could be taken

for solving the problem of water scarcity and conserving water.
3.Write a letter to the editor of a newspaper expressing your
views on the deteriorating law and order situation in your

city.4.Write a letter to your friend narrating your experiences in a
rescue operation.5.Write a letter to the Editor of a magazine describing a dance
performance you have seen or an art gallery you have visited.

