THE AILING PLANET: THE GREEN MOVEMENT™S ROLE435.  The Ailing Planet: the Green
 Movement™s RoleNani PalkhivalaNotice these expressions in the text.Infer their meaning from the context.a holistic and ecological viewinter aliasustainable developmentdecimatedlanguishcatastrophic depletionignominious darknesstranscending concernThe following article was written by Nani Palkhivala andpublished in The Indian Express on 24 November 1994. The
issues that he raised regarding the declining health of the earthcontinue to have relevance.ONE cannot recall any movement in world history which hasgripped the imagination of the entire human race so completelyand so rapidly as the Green Movement which started nearlytwenty-five years ago. In 1972 the world™s first nationwide Greenparty was founded in New Zealand. Since then, the movement
has not looked back.We have shifted Š one hopes, irrevocably Š from the
mechanistic view to a holistic and ecological view of the world.It is a shift in human perceptions as revolutionary as that
44H
ORNBILLintroduced by Copernicus who taught mankind in the sixteenthcentury that the earth and the other planets revolved round the
sun. For the first time in human history, there is a growingworldwide consciousness that the earth itself is a livingorganism Š an enormous being of which we are parts. It has its
own metabolic needs and vital processes which need to be
respected and preserved.The earth™s vital signs reveal a patient in declining health.We have begun to realise our ethical obligations to be good
stewards of the planet and responsible trustees of the legacy to
future generations.The concept of sustainable development was popularisedin 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and

Development. In its report it defined the idea as ﬁDevelopmentthat meets the needs of the present, without compromising theability of future generations to meet their needsﬂ, i.e., without
stripping the natural world of resources future generations
would need.In the zoo at Lusaka, Zambia, there is a cage where the noticereads, ‚The world™s most dangerous animal™. Inside the cage there
is no animal but a mirror where you see yourself. Thanks to the
efforts of a number of agencies in different countries, a new
awareness has now dawned upon the most dangerous animal in
the world. He has realised the wisdom of shifting from a system
based on domination to one based on partnership.Scientists have catalogued about 1.4 million living specieswith which mankind shares the earth. Estimates vary widely asregards the still-uncatalogued living species Š biologists reckon
that about three to a hundred million other living species still
languish unnamed in ignominious darkness.One of the early international commissions which dealt, interalia, with the question of ecology and environment was the BrandtCommission which had a distinguished Indian as one of its
members Š Mr L.K. Jha. The First Brandt Report raised the
question Š ﬁAre we to leave our successors a scorched planet of
advancing deserts, impoverished landscapes and ailing
environment?ﬂMr Lester R. Brown in his thoughtful book, The GlobalEconomic Prospect, points out that the earth™s principalbiological systems are four Š fisheries, forests, grasslands, andcroplands Š and they form the foundation of the global
