50H
ORNBILL6.  The Browning Version
Terence RattiganNotice these expressions in the text.Infer their meaning from the context.remove
kept insadistslackers got carried awayshrivelled upmuckcutThis is an excerpt from 
The Browning Version*.
 The scene is setin a school. Frank is young and Crocker-Harris, middle-aged. Both
are masters. Taplow is a boy of sixteen who has come in to do
extra work for Crocker-Harris. But the latter has not yet arrived,
and Frank finds Taplow waiting.
FRANK:Do I know you?
TAPLOW:No, sir.
FRANK:What™s your name?
TAPLOW:Taplow.
FRANK:Taplow! No, I don™t. You™re not a scientist I gather?
TAPLOW:No, sir, I™m still in the lower fifth. I can™t specialise
until next term Š that™s to say, if I™ve got my
remove 
all right.FRANK:Don™t you know if you™ve got your remove?
TAPLOW:No sir, Mr Crocker-Harris doesn™t tell us the results
like the other masters.*The reference within the play of Robert Browning™s translation of the Greek
tragedy, Agamemnon
THE BROWNING VERSION51FRANK:Why not?
TAPLOW:Well, you know what he™s like, sir.
FRANK:I believe there is a rule that form results should
only be announced by the headmaster on the lastday of term.
TAPLOW:Yes Š but who else pays attention to it Š except
Mr Crocker-Harris?
FRANK:I don™t, I admit Š but that™s no criterion. So you™ve
got to wait until tomorrow to know your fate, have

you?TAPLOW:Yes, sir.
FRANK:Supposing the answer is favourable Š what then?
TAPLOW:Oh Š science, sir, of course.
FRANK:(sadly) Yes. We get all the
 slackers.TAPLOW:(protestingly
) I™m extremely interested in science, sir.
FRANK:Are you? I™m not. Not, at least, in the science I
have to teach.TAPLOW:Well, anyway, sir, it™s a good deal more exciting
than this muck (indicating his book).FRANK:What is this muck?
TAPLOW:Aeschylus, sir. The 
Agamemnon.FRANK:And your considered view is that the 
Agamemnonis muck?TAPLOW:Well, no, sir. I don™t think the play is muck Š
exactly. I suppose, in a way, it™s rather a goodplot, really, a wife murdering her husband and all
that. I only meant the way it™s taught to us Š just
a lot of Greek words strung together and fifty lines
if you get them wrong.
FRANK:You sound a little bitter, Taplow.
TAPLOW:I am rather, sir.
FRANK:Kept in, eh?TAPLOW:No, sir. Extra work.
FRANK:Extra work Š on the last day of school?

52H
ORNBILLTAPLOW:Yes, sir, and I might be playing golf. You™d
think he™d have enough to do anyway himself,considering he™s leaving tomorrow for good Š
but oh no, I missed a day last week when Iwas ill Š so here I am Š and look at the

weather, sir.
FRANK:Bad luck. Still there™s one comfort. You™re pretty
well certain to get your remove tomorrow for being
a good boy in taking extra work.TAPLOW:Well, I™m not so sure, sir. That would be true of
the ordinary masters, all right. They just wouldn™t

dare not to give a chap a remove after his takingextra work. But those sort of rules don™t apply tothe Crock Š Mr Crocker-Harris. I asked him

yesterday outright if he™d given me a remove and

do you know what he said, sir?FRANK:No. What?
TAPLOW:(imitating a very gentle, rather throaty voice
) ﬁMydear Taplow, I have given you exactly what  you
deserve. No less; and certainly no more.ﬂ Do youknow sir, I think he may have marked me down,
rather than up, for taking extra work. I mean, the
man™s hardly human. (
He breaks off
 quickly.)Sorry, sir. Have I gone too far?
FRANK:Yes. Much too far.
TAPLOW:Sorry, sir. I 
got carried away.FRANK:Evidently. (
He picks up a newspaper and opens it) ŠEr Taplow.
TAPLOW:Yes, sir?
FRANK:What was that Crocker-Harris said to you? Just Š
er Š repeat it, would  you?
TAPLOW:(imitating again) ﬁMy dear Taplow, I have given
you exactly what you deserve. No less; andcertainly no more.ﬂ
FRANK:(looking severe
) Not in the least like him. Readyour nice Aeschylus and be quiet.TAPLOW:(with dislike) Aeschylus.
