22H
ORNBILL3.  Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues
A. R. WilliamsNotice these expressions in the text.Infer their meaning from the context.forensic reconstructionfunerary treasuresscudded acrosscircumventedcasket greycomputed tomographyresurrectioneerie detailHe was just a teenager when he
died. The last heir of a powerful
family that had ruled Egypt and its

empire for centuries, he was laid to

rest laden with gold and eventually
forgotten. Since the discovery of his

tomb in 1922, the modern world

has speculated about what
happened to him, with murder being
the most extreme possibility. Now,
leaving his tomb for the first time
in almost 80 years, Tut has

undergone a CT scan that offers
new clues about his life and death Š
and provides precise data for an
accurate forensic reconstruction
of the boyish pharaoh.
DISCOVERING TUT: THE SAGA CONTINUES23AN angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as King Tut was taken
from his resting place in the ancient Egyptian cemetery known asthe Valley of the Kings*. Dark-bellied clouds had 
scudded across
the desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket
grey. It was 6 p.m. on 5 January 2005. The world™s most famous
mummy glided head first into a CT scanner brought here to probe

the lingering medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler
who died more than 3,300 years ago.All afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the worldhad descended into the cramped, rock-cut tomb some 26 feet
underground to pay their respects. They gazed at the murals on thewalls of the burial chamber and peered at Tut™s gilded face, the most
striking feature of his mummy-shaped outer coffin lid. Some visitorsread from guidebooks in a whisper. Others stood silently, perhaps
pondering Tut™s untimely death in his late teens, or wondering with
a shiver if the pharaoh™s curse Š death or misfortune falling upon
those who disturbed him Š was really true.
ﬁThe mummy is in very bad condition because of what Carterdid in the 1920s,ﬂ said Zahi Hawass, Secretary General of Egypt™sSupreme Council of Antiquities, as he leaned over the body for along first look. CarterŠHoward Carter, that is Š was the British

archaeologist who in 1922 discovered Tut™s tomb after years of

futile searching. Its contents, though hastily ransacked in antiquity,were surprisingly complete. They remain the richest royal collection
ever found and have become part of the pharaoh™s legend. Stunning
artefacts in gold, their eternal brilliance meant to guarantee
resurrection, caused a sensation at the time of the discovery Š
and still get the most attention. But Tut was also buried with
everyday things he™d want in the afterlife: board games, a bronzerazor, linen undergarments, cases of food and wine.
After months of carefully recording the pharaoh™s funerarytreasures, Carter began investigating his three nested coffins.Opening the first, he found a shroud adorned with garlands ofwillow and olive leaves, wild celery, lotus petals, and cornflowers,

the faded evidence of a burial in March or April. When he finally
reached the mummy, though, he ran into trouble. The ritual resinshad hardened, cementing Tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin.

ﬁNo amount of legitimate force could move them,ﬂ Carter wrotelater. ﬁWhat was to be done?ﬂ
The sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in Egypt,and Carter tried to use it to loosen the resins. For several hours*See map on next page

