The air was sizzling with the energy of the crowded spectators;children in front, women in a special section, and everyone else
crowding in over the palace walls and ledges. The dancing began
with an aarti. The music here is sophisticated, as is the style, with the
arms moving in beautiful patterns, both geometric and lyricalÖ   The

masks are heavy and do not permit the dancers to breathe normally,
so after a particularly strenuous piece, the performer flings himself
onto the line of attendants, gasping madly. They inevitably collapse
like dominoes onto the screaming children, as they frantically rip
off their masks. This adds to the strange, unearthly feeling of
the evening...On the fourth night, the dance festival begins at the Kalika Ghat.The dancer wears a black costume and covered in black body paint
looks terrifying. He dances his way up in a trance from the river,

surrounded by the bhaktas, and comes to the Shiva temple. Outsidethe temple a brief ceremony takes place in front of a small fire while
the dancer sways his body and rolls his eyes.ñ Extract from an article on Chhau by R
AM RAHMANTHEATRE CRAFTS
10Chhau  performance,
West Bengal

112LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAStory-tellingEveryone loves a good story. We have heard stories from
our grandparents, parents, family and friends throughout
our childhood.In India we have invented many ways of telling stories.A few of them are described below.Puppetry: A puppet is a doll or figure representing a person,
animal, object or an idea and is used to tell a story. The

puppet is made of various materials and can be moved in
different ways. Puppets are classified as follows on the basis
of the way they are moved in performance:string puppetsglove puppetsrod puppetsshadow puppetsGlove puppet, KeralaBhopa (narrator), RajasthanScroll Paintings: There aredifferent kinds of scroll
paintings in India. Scroll
paintings usually done on
cloth are narratives on
different social and religious
themes. The narrators sing
and explain these themes,
sometimes accompanied byinstrumentalists. Especially
famous are the scroll
paintings from Rajasthan,
West Bengal 
and Orissa.Shadow puppets, Andhra PradeshString puppets, Karnataka

113THEATRE CRAFTSTheatre: It is a great form for story-telling in which one or
more actors using the skills of dancing, acting, singing,
talking, miming and theatre crafts like masks, make-up
and costumes create a story world for us.
Every corner of India has its own unique form of folktheatre ó the lively Nautanki of Uttar Pradesh which oftendraws on romantic Persian literature for its themes; raw
vigour and bawdy humour characterise the Tamasha ofMaharashtra or the Bhavai of Gujarat; the blood andthunder of the Jatra melodramas of Bengal which are ingreat demand during Puja (Dussehra) festivities: or the
dance-drama form of 
Yakshagana 
from Karnataka, to name
just a few.In this chapter we look at only a few of these to encourageyou to look for and discover any similar traditions that
exist in your own neighbourhood.Masks, make-up and costumesKathakali mask, KeralaMasksWhy did our ancestors use masks, and why are they still
being used in several parts of our country?In many tribal societies across the world, masks stillhave a ritual significance. People believe that by wearing
or putting on a mask, the person ëbecomesí the character
depicted on the mask.Masks, those magical objects with which we cover ourfaces and assume a different identity, have a rich and varied
tradition in our country.From the delicate pastel coloured masks and shimmeringhead-dresses worn by Chhau dancers to the demon dancemasks of the Buddhist monasteries of Ladakh to the
inexpensive animal masks of papier-m‡chÈ available in

our cities, India has a vast and ancient tradition of masks
and make-up for rituals and theatre.Theatre: a Composite Art Form
Theatre is a composite art form in which many skills, arts and craftsare brought together. A wide range of craft objects are made especially

for use in drama, dance or music performances, such as the following:masks
make-up
head-dresses
costumeslightweight jewellerysceneries and stagesmusic with drums andtrumpets, manjiras
114LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAHow the Chhau Mask Is MadeThe most beautiful masks in our country are made for theChhau dance form. Chhau is a style performed exclusively
by men from the triangular area where Bihar, Bengal and

Orissa meet. This is the tribal belt of India ó home to the
tribal groups of Bhulya, Santhals, Mundas, Hos and
Oraons. The masks they use vary depending on the style
of Chhau practised ó Seraikella Chhau or Purulia Chhau.
In the third form of Chhau, Mayurbhanj Chhau, masks

are not worn.The Chhau mask is made of  pottersí clay
(matti ghada) over which layers of muslin are
pasted followed by paper (kagaz chitano). Usinga delicate wooden chisel, different features of
the mask are polished ó the nose, eyes, ears,
chin and lips. Once it is dried it is painted in
pastel colours (kahij lepa). Then the mask isseparated from the clay model and fully dried
in the sun. The clay is then reshaped to make
another mask. Finally, the mask is worn with a
highly decorated head-dress of tinsel, pearls,
coloured paper and artificial flowers.Mask making is a hereditary occupation andmask makers come from Chorinda village in
Bengal. Masks are made between February and
June as it does not rain at this time, but the
fragility of the mask ensures its makers are
always in high demand. It is only in Chhau that
all the dancers wear masks. The sophistication
of technique and expression is most evident
when the mask is seen in movement. Though
they appear flat and neutral with their
distinguishing features of arched eyebrows and
elongated half-closed eyes, the masks acquire114L
IVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
115THEATRE CRAFTSa whole range of expression with every twist and turn ofthe body. Accompanied by the huge dhamsa drums and
two energetic dhol players who provoke and encourage the
dancers, the Chhau dancer makes lightning body

movements known as chamak.Excavations have revealed small hollow masks datingback to the Indus Valley Civilisation. In fact in Bihar a

terracotta mask of the fourth century has also been
excavated. The Natya Shastra speaks of masks and their
use in theatre. Here it is mentioned that masks can be
made of ground paddy husks applied to cloth.115THEATRE CRAFTS
116LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIADid you know...The best known leather puppets in our country are thoseused in the Tholu Bomalatta of Andhra Pradesh. The originsof these puppets can be traced back to about 2000 BCE, as
they are mentioned in the Mahabharata.Leather puppets are made out of the hides of goat, deerand buffalo. The skin is treated with herbs and oils, and
then beaten till it becomes translucent. The different parts
of the puppetís body are separately cut out of this skin.
Gods and heroes are made the largest in size, because of
their importance. Minute elaborate shapes are punched in
the skin to delineate the gorgeous costumes and jewellery
of each figure. They are then dyed, according to the different
colours assigned to each of them. Carving out the eyes is
done last for this symbolises bringing the figures to life.The angle of the head has significance: a downwardglance suggests modesty, a high chin indicates arrogance.
Colours too have meaning: giant bullies and their kind have
red faces, while white stands for a fiery nature. The pieces
are then joined together with a thick knotted string, which
facilitates easy movement. A split-bamboo or palm leaf stem
is used for 
the main central support of the puppet. Thelegs are loosely attached from below the knees, and themanipulator can
jerk the puppet toproduce the swayingmovement of the legs.The screen for theshadow puppet showis a bamboo box-likestage erected in theopen air. In the rural
areas, very often, oillamps made of split
coconut shells areused for lighting. The flickering light keepsthe puppets in constant movement, and lendsan air of magic to the show. Music forms anintrinsic part of the puppet show, and makingmusical instruments is a major craftoccupation all over India.Leather shadow puppet, Kerala
117THEATRE CRAFTSMusical InstrumentsMusic is an important component of the performing artslike dance and drama, and of rituals. Each community has
its own style of music and tradition of songs.There are essentially two ways to make music: with thehuman voice and with an instrument.The musical instruments are classified on the basis ofthe scientific principle used to create the sound they make.
They are briefly described below.Percussion Instruments: These instruments are struck to
produce sound. Often these are used to produce the taal or
beat and do not produce all the musical notesómanjeeraor cymbals.Wind Instruments: These need air to flow through them to
produce soundóbansuri or flute.
String Instruments: These are instruments that use oneor many tightly tied strings that when struck vibrate to
create soundóthe veena or 
ektara.Drums: A drum is made of a membrane stretched across a
hollow frame and played by striking ó the dholak or
mridangam.Drums of IndiaA membrane made of hide, tautlystretched over a bowl or frame, is
the key element in generating
drum sounds ó which is why this
family of musical instruments is
called membranophones. Tablas,dholaks, damrus, naggadas,
chendas and many others fall in
this category.Drum makers are specialists;chiselling a solid block of wood
to create just the right pitch is
skilled work, and is very exacting.
Although the drum base is
sometimes carved, the craftsmanis more concerned with the audio
effect of the cavity, its size and
shape, and the thickness of the

wood that is to be used, than
with the form or decoration of
the drum.
118LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIADholak: We come across the 
dholakwallah most commonly
in our cities. Though it looks simple, dholak making involves
a great deal of effort. To start with, the wood has to be
perfectly seasoned. Dholakwallahs buy the readymade
wooden shells primarily from Amroha in Uttar Pradesh.These shells are smoothened and vigorously polishedwith a special mud-paste. Thick string is toughened and
interwoven through hooks in the shell. Goat leather flaps
are hemmed onto the two sidesóand the 
dholak is ready.
Then comes the sound testing routineórhythmic tappingto determine if the notes are right.Dholakwallahs belong mainly to Uttar Pradesh coming
from Barabanki, Gonda, Allahabad and Kanpur. They are

nomadic and travel the length and breadth of the country
selling their ëwonder drumsí wherever they go. A market
for dholaks exists all over India, with Delhi, Bombay,
Lucknow and Amritsar as the main centres.
Dholaks are used by almost all sections of society during
religious festivities and on special occasions like the birth
of a child and weddings. The beat of a dholak can be
regularly heard in temples and gurudwaras.Damru: It is a tiny two-sided drum that often has a string
and a stone fixed to it, and is used by the madari.Try and find out which Hindu god is depicted playing
a damru.Naggadda: It is a large, resounding drum used in North
India as accompaniment by folk performers in nautanki, ortraditionally, to announce the arrival of royalty. It is played
using drumsticks.Its South Indian counterpart is the chhenda that
produces the sharp percussion that accompanies the
Kathakali dance.Chenda player, Kerala
Naggadda player
Pakhawaj player

119THEATRE CRAFTSWind InstrumentsIn folk music a variety of windinstruments are popular, for

example, flutes played bothhorizontally and vertically, algoja,pawa, satara, turhi, shehnai,shankh, been (pungi) etc.
Been: The snake-charmerís been,a reed wind instrument of a
strange shape is anothercommonplace sight in our cities.A been is made out of a 
kaddu(gourd), that has been dried andhollowed out. The saperas (snake
charmers) plant the gourd
creeper themselves, in a special way, so that the gourddoes not touch the ground. Growing on the creeper, it
develops a fully elongated shape, best suited for making
the been.The sapera selects a particular gourd and dries it in the
shade as the rays of the sun can produce cracks on the
outer skin. The gourd is then cleaned, seasoned and holesare made on the top and bottom of the instrument.The panja or the reed portion is made separately. Two
bamboo sticks, about a foot long are attached to the gourdwith bees wax. One of the panjas provides a constant steady
note: a drone, while the other is fashioned like a flute,
with all the seven swaras or notes tuned, before it is
attached. A fine tongue of kluck reed (kaanna) is insertedin both the panjas so that the tonal quality remains the
same. The instrument is then blown upon to producedifferent melodies.The been is accompanied by percussion instruments like
the bugdoo, duff or 
dholki. A complete been orchestra
consists of two beens, a bugdoo, a dholak and a 
duff.Cowrie shells have always been associated with the been.Strings of these shells are tied around the rounded gourd
and some of the shells may even be hung as tassels fromone end of the been. Silken tassels and sometimes silver
ornaments may be suspended from one end.The sapera takes great pride in his 
been. It is usuallyhung from a cloth belt around his waist and when not in
use, it hangs from a hook on a wall of his house.Tremendous stamina is required in order to play the 
beenfor long periods as it requires a lot of breath control.
Been player

120LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPercussion InstrumentsChikka: It is an instrument unique to Punjab. Similar tothe cane snake available in many parts of the country, the
chikha is made up of 14 wooden sticks joint together as alattice. By opening and sharply shutting the chikkha, asharp sound similar to clapping is produced.Chimta: Very similar to an actual pair of tongs used in the
kitchen, the chimta has small metal discs loosely attachedto it which strike against each other when the arms of the
chimta are struck.
Mashak: It is made of the leather bag used by villagers to
transport water! It is like a basic bagpipe, the national
musical instrument of Scotland! The mashak is usually
played by the Dholis of Rajasthan as accompaniment to
popular folk melodies.Kirla: It is a stick with a carved squirrel or fish at the top.
A cord fixed to the top jerks the galad up with a sharp
click, while bells fixed to the bottom of the kirla jingle.Khadtaal: We often see this instrument depicted in the
hands of Meerabai and other Bhaktikaleen poets of the
Medieval period. Held in one hand, the khadtaal is made of
Musical instruments in Bhangra performance, Punjab
121THEATRE CRAFTStwo similar pieces of wood with brass fittings. One piece of
it has space for a thumb, the other for four fingers, these
are struck together to produce a simple percussive beat. It
is easy to see the close resemblance between a khadtaaland the Spanish castanets, used as accompaniment for
the famous Flamenco music and dance.Manjeeras: These form an important part of the terah-talidance, where they are worn all over the body!  Manjeerasare a pair of flat metallic disks that are beaten together to
produce a rhythmic metallic sound. Apart from a pair of
manjeeras held in each hand, the 
terah-tali dancers wear
manjeeras on their legs and additional ones on their armsand shoulders!  Seated on the ground they rotate and swayó

each movement being punctuated by the rhythmic sound
of several manjeeras coming in contact with one another.
String InstrumentsInstruments in which sound is produced bystriking the strings made of iron, steel, brass
or other metals as well as goatís gut, cotton,
silk threads etc. are known as string or
chordophonic instruments. Some of the string
instruments such as ektara, ravanhattha and
gopijantra are used as accompanying
instruments in traditional performances.
Bhopas use the 
ektara while performing 
Bapujika phad, a tradtional story-telling performanceof Rajasthan.A pair of manjeeras
1.Here is a list of some of the drums of India: 
pakhawaj,
mridangam, ghatam, thavil, dhol, maddalam, edakka,

talam, nal, thumbak nari.
 Can you find out where each
one is from? Investigate to find out how it is used, who

makes it, its history, what other instruments are used

along with it, and the names of these local instruments.2.A wide range of craft objects are made especially for use
in drama, dance or music performances such as masks,
make-up, head-dresses, costumes, lightweight jewellery,
sceneries and musical instruments. Study one such craft
used in the performing arts tradition of your region. How
is it made, who makes it, how is it used and what effect
dose it create during the performance.
3.Make a map of different theatre forms in India.

4.Write a profile of an actor/performer from your region.

5.Several traditional theatre performances during harvest
and Dussehra draw performers from specific
occupational groups. Investigate this in your own region.6.Theatre is a composite art form involving many different
crafts and skills. Make a topic web to illustrate the idea.7.Now that you have a birdís eye view of Indian crafts,
imagine yourself to be Chairman of the All India
Handicrafts and Handloom Board. Devise a ten-point
programme indicating your priorities for the development
of the crafts sector. Give reasons for your answers.
122EXERCISE.............................122L
IVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
Suggested ReadingArt and Rituals of the Warli Tribes of Maharashtra 
by YASHODHARA DALMIA.Lalit Kala Academy, New Delhi.Art and Swadeshi 
by ANANDA  K. C
OOMARASWAMY
. Munshiram Manoharlal
Publications Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi.Arts and Crafts of India by I
LAY COOPER AND JOHN GILLOW. Thames andHudson Ltd, London.Children of Barren Women
 by P
UPUL JAYAKAR
. Penguin Books.
Classical Musical Instruments by SUNEERA KASLIWAL
. Rupa & Co., Delhi.
Crafts and Craftsmen in Traditional India 
by M.K. P
AL. Kanak
Publications, Delhi.Crafts of Himachal Pradesh by  SUBHASHINI  ARYAN and R. K. D
ATTA GUPTA.Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.Crafts of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh by JAYA JAITLY. Mapin Publishing
Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.Dynamic Folk Toys by SUDARSHAN KHANNA. National Book Trust, New Delhi.Folk Arts and Crafts of India by JASLEEN DHAMIJA. Indus Publishing Co.,
Delhi.Folk Theatre of India 
by GARGI BALWANT
. National Book Trust, New Delhi.
Forms and Many Forms of Mother Clay by HAKU SHAH. National
Handlooms and Handicrafts Museum, New Delhi.Gangadevi Tradition and Expression in Mithila Painting 
by JYOTINDRAJAIN. Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.
Hand Woven Fabrics of India 
by DHAMIJA, JASLEEN and J
YOTINDRA JAIN.Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.Handicrafted Indian Enamel Jewellery by RIVA
 DEVI SHARMA and
M. VARADARAJAN. Roli Books, Delhi.
Handicrafts of India by KAMALADEVI CHATTOPADHYAYA. Delhi.
Himachal Pradesh by H.K
. MATTOO. National Book Trust, New Delhi.Incredible India: Crafting Nature by JAYA JAITLY. Wisdom Tree, Delhi.Indian Embroideries (Vol. II)
 by J
OHN IRVIN
 and M
ARGARET HALL,S. R. BASTIKAR. Calico Museum of Textiles, Ahmedabad.
Indian Folk Arts and Crafts by JASLEEN DHAMIJA. National Book Trust,
New Delhi.Indian Jewellery Ornaments and Decorative Art by JAMILA BRIJBHUSAN.Bombay.
Indian Textiles 
by  S.K. S
ARASWATI
. The Publications Division, Ministryof Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.Indian Textiles by G.K. GHOSH and S
HUKLA GHOSH. APH PublishingCorporation, New Delhi.Indian Tye 
ñ Dyed Fabrics by  A
LFRED BIHLER, EBERHARD FISCHER and
MARIE LOUISE NABHOLZ. Calico Museum of Textiles, Ahmedabad.Musical Instruments of India 
by S. BANDOPADHYAY
. Orientalia, Varanasi
and Delhi.Painted Myths of Creation: Art and Ritual of an Indian Tribe 
by  J
YOTINDRAJAIN. Lalit Kala Academy, New Delhi.
Paramparik Karigar. Rupa & Co., New Delhi.Performance Traditions in India 
by SURESH AWASTHI
. National Book
Trust, New Delhi.Sari:  The Kalakshetra Tradition 
by  SHAKUNTALA
 RAMANI. Craft Educationand Research Centre, Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai.
Stone Craft of India (2 Volumes) 
by N
EELAM CHHIBBAR. Craft Council ofIndia.The Arts and Crafts of India and Ceylon by ANANDA K. C
OOMARASWAMY
.Today & Tomorrowís Printers & Publishers, New Delhi.The Arts of India by  G.C.M. B
IRDWOOD. Rupa & Co., New Delhi.The Earthen Drum by P
UPUL JAYAKAR. Penguin Books.The Indian Craftsman 
by ANANDA K. C
OOMARASWAMY
. MunshiramManoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi.The Industrial Arts of India by G.C.M. B
IRDWOOD. Chapman & Hall, London.
Threads of Identity: Embroidery and Adornments of the Nomadic Rabarisby JUDY FRATER. Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.Traditional Wisdom ñ Bamboo and Cane Crafts of North-east India
 by
M.P. R
ANJAN, NILAM IYER and G
HANSHYAM
 PANDYA
, National Instituteof Design, Ahmedabad.Tye ñ Dyed T
extiles of India: Tradition and Trade 
by VERONICA MURPHYand ROSEMARY CRILL. Mapin Publishing Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad.Visvakarmaís Children: Stories of Indiaís Craft People by J
AYA JAITLY.Institute of Social Sciences and Concept Publishing Company,
New Delhi.
