Paper came to India with Muslim traders, in the eleventh centuryC.E. It only slowly and gradually displaced the Corypha palm
leaf, the use of which had the sanction of age and religion among
the conservative Indian literates who looked with distrust upon
this new productÖThere is no Sanskrit word for paper. The Chinese word is
kog-dz, the ëpaper made of the bark 
of the paper-mulberry treeí.
When the Arabs, in the eighth century, learned paper-making

from the Chinese, they adopted the Chinese name for their own
paper made of linen rags. The Persian word for paper, 
kaghaz,became kagaj in Hindustani.
By the fourteenth century, paper became popular in India.By the beginning of the seventeenth century paper had
displaced Corypha leaves throughout northern India.
ñ  A. F. R. H
OERNLE, ëPalm-leaf, Paper and Bir
ch-barkí,Journal of Asiatic Society,
 Vol. LXIX, 1901
How Paper Is MadeCan you imagine a day in your life without paper? A timewhen there was no paper or books or when people looked
with distrust at it? Originally clay, stone, birch-bark, cloth,

aloe bark and palm leaf were some of the materials on
which writing was done.Paper is one of the raw materials for making varioustypes of craft items like folk paintings, illustrated
manuscripts, lamp shades, photo-frames and a variety of
decorative artefacts.PAPER CRAFTS 7Factory-made paper is now generally made of tightly packed and
pressed fibres of rags, straw, wood, bamboo etc.Handmade paper is made of pulp (obtained from the bark of certain
trees) mixed with glues, and waste cloth from garment manufacturers.Handmade paperFactory-made paper
74LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPaper ToysToy-makers, especially those living in cities and industrial
areas, make use of materials like paper, cardboard, palm-
leaf,clay, bamboo strips, pith, and papier-m‡chÈ along with other

recycled materials to create toys for children. Discarded itemsincluding newspaper, string, rubber bands are recycled to
create toys. The toymaker creates a number of different
playthings such as kites, puppets, string-manipulated toys,rattles, drums, damrus and whistles, moving toys like wind-
wheels, animal toys like the jumping snake, mystery boxes,
and jack-in-the-box kind of toys. Apart from toy-making, Indiancraftsmen also produce a wide variety of decorative and
utilitarian items by using plain, white and coloured papers.Paper Cuts: The craftsmen of MathurañBrindavan area
make intricate paper-cut designs (locally known as

Sanjhi) depicting various Krishnalila scenes. During
festivals and marriages the craftsmen make exquisitelybeautiful paper-cut flowers and varied colourful items

that are used for decoration.Stencil: A stencil is a piece of paper, plastic or metal which
has a design cut out of it. When the stencil is placed on a
surface and paint applied over it, the paint goes throughthe cut out portions and leaves a design on the surfacewhen the stencil is removed.
Use of Paper Craft in Different SocietiesDuring Muharram a model of the tomb of Imam Hussain calledthe Tazia is adorned with floral designs made out of coloured
papers.In Poland people use paper-cuts of the ëTree of Lifeí, guarded
by two cocks. The symmetry of the paper-cut technique is

said to protect the house and home.The Mexicans use cut-paper flags with designs of planets,
plants and a repetitive border with triangles that  symbolise

male and female energies. While sowing,  farmers place a paper

man to represent the male spirit of germination, while the

harvest is represented as a female doll.In China, peasants have developed paper-cuts into a rich

individual popular art. The paper cuts are stuck on walls or
window-panes of their cottages and changed frequently. The
most popular themes are 
the ëTree of 
Lifeí, cocks and hens,etc. that are all symbols of life.Sanjhi, Mathura
Paper toy, DelhiPaper toy, Delhi
75PAPER CRAFTSHistory of Papier-m‡chÈPapier-m‡chÈ is used to create moulded forms of a variety
of objects. It involves ornamentation of smoothened
surfaces built up of paper pulp or layers of paper. The

most sophisticated form of paper craft appears to be
papier-m‡chÈ.The tradition of papier
-m‡chÈ in 
Kashmir began in thefifteenth century. While in prison, in the magnificent
Central Asian city of Samarkand, a young Kashmiri prince
observed the craft of using paper pulp as the base for
painted objects. This prince soon became King Zain-ul-
Abidin and invited accomplished artists and craftsmen from
Central Asia to his court to make papier
-m‡chÈ objects.The craft was originally known in Kashmir as Kar-i-
qalamdan, being confined to ornamentation of cases thenused for keeping pens as well as some other small personal
articles. The craft was also known as Kar-i-munaqqash
since it was used for ornamenting smooth surfaces made
of paper pulp or layers of polished paper.
The Mughal period saw the art extended to palanquins,ceilings, bedsteads, doors and windows. In the old days
the technique of papier-m‡chÈ was artistically applied

to wood work, especially windows, wall panels, ceilings
and furniture as is evident from the fine ceiling at Madin
Sahib Mosque (1444), the ceiling at the Shah Hamdan
Mosque at 
Fatehkadal and the Mughal Gardens at Shalimarin Srinagar.
During the seventeenthcentury, early European
travellers discovered this
highly decorative and
marketable craft. Papier-

m‡chÈ 
artists of Kashmirtailored some of their
production to the needs

and taste of a western
market that demanded
nested boxes (a set of boxes
that fit into each other),
vases and other suitably
exotic trinkets. Just as the
export of Kashmiri shawls
boomed, so did the papier-

m‡chÈ business.Papier-m‡chÈ boxSet of papier-m‡chÈcoasters and boxPapier-m‡chÈ: a French
term meaning ëmashed
paperí
76LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPapier-m‡chÈ of KashmirThe raw materials used in making papier
-m‡chÈ 
articlesusually include old newsprint, methi (fenugreek) powder,
Multani mitti or clay.
In South India, waste paper pulp is hand-beaten into asoft substance and mixed with local clay. It is rolled out

into thin sheets placed over any complicated mould. The
articles are finally dipped into a thin solution of paper
pulp and white clay to provide a smooth uniform surface.
The objects are then painted in oil or water colour.
The process of papier-m‡chÈ making in Kashmir, which
described below, is rather elaborate and interesting and
undertaken by a group of people called Sakhta makers.1.Waste paper, cloth, rice straw and copper sulphate
are taken together and ground into pulp.2.After the pulp is ready, clay, wooden or
brass moulds are used to give it the
required shape. When the pulp is dry
the shape is cut away from the mould

in two halves with a fine saw and glued
together again.3.The surface is coated with a white layer
of gypsum and glue and rubbed smooth
with a stone or a piece of baked brick,
called Kurket.
77PAPER CRAFTS4.Then the object is pasted
with layers of tissue paper
to prevent it from cracking.5.Finally, the object is
sand-papered and
burnished, ready for the
colourful artistry of the
naqash or painter, who
seals his work with
several coats of a varnish
made of linseed oil and
pine resin.6.The ground may be in
colour or gold or tin foil; it
is burnished with a piece
of agate after drying.7.It has to dry naturally and
only then is the design
drawn and painted in
water colour.
8. These days painting is donein distemper colours. The
colours are made from
pigments diluted in water
to which some glue is
added to fix it to the ground.
The brushes for painting
objects are made from the
bristles of the hair of cat,
goat or ass.
9.The final varnishing is
done with a very pure and
transparent glaze of copal
dissolved in turpentine.Painted DesignsIn the papier-m‡chÈ of 
Kashmir the rich and variedfloral designs include the chinar, the iris
, the Persianrose, the almond, cherry blossom, the tulip,
narcissus, and hyacinth. The most famous is the
hazara (thousand) pattern which seeks to display
every conceivable flower on the smallest of objects
and gulandergul or ëflower within flowerí. The
kingfisher and the bulbul are common bird forms.
78LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPapier-m‡chÈ in IndiaIn Kashmir, a large variety of both utilitarianand decorative papier-m‡chÈ items are

produced such as writing table sets, dressing
table wares, boxes, bowls, bangles, lamp-

stands, flower vases, cups, boxes, powder

cases, trays, shields, wall plaques, panels
for ceilings, picture frames, caddies, screens
and cabinets.
In Rajasthan too, papier-m‡chÈ is a
traditional craft with a concentration
of craftsperson in Jaipur. The products

include animals and birds,
particularly cocks, parrots and
pigeons. Papier-m‡chÈ bowls are also

produced in Banasthali.In Madhya Pradesh, a wide
range of products are available
in papier-m‡chÈ, such as

human figures, birds, animals,
caricatures, statues of gods
and goddesses, models of
Khajuraho and Sanchi.
Important centres for this craft
are Gwalior, Ujjain, Indore and

Harda.Amusing folk toys with detachable orhinged parts such as nodding tigers and
elephants, old men and women with
comic expressions, are made in papier-

m‡chÈ in Orissa. Masks of popularmythological characters are also made.
The craft is concentrated in Puri,
Cuttack and Ganjam.Nazir Ahmed Mir was born in Srinagar on  16
February 1969 in a family engaged in this
traditional craft.While he was pursuing his studies inschool, the sudden death of his father forced
him to earn a livelihood for the family.He developed great skill and interest in
papier-m‡chÈ craft which inspired him to
make many new,uncommon and delicate
designs. There are at least
twenty of his designs in
the market.Nazir Ahmed Mir receivedthe National Award for
excellence in papier-m
‡chÈcraft in 2000 and 2001.The craft is practised in a number of States,namely, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Jammu and

Kashmir, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.

79PAPER CRAFTSPapier-m‡chÈ is also popular in 
Kerala.Trained artists in Kozhikode make a large

number of figures based on Kathakali and
temple models out of paper pulp. They also
produce lively figures of animals and birds
that are in great demand.
Subhadra Devi was born in1936 in Darbhanga District,
Bihar. She started working

with papier-m‡chÈ at the

age of fifteen. At first she
made idols for festivals. As
her interest, grew she joined
Shilp Anusandhan Sansthan,
Patna for training. In 1980
Subhadra  Devi was given the

State Award in appreciation
of her artistic merits. She has
exhibited her craft all over
India and recieved the
National Award for excellence
in papier mache craft in 1991.
In Bihar, the craft is found in various parts ofthe State. Papier-m‡chÈ figurines and different

kinds of birds are made by women from
Madhubani and Darbhanga Districts. Though
papier-m‡chÈ  containers cannot be used to hold

liquids, it is used for the storage of dry items.The craftsmen of Purulia in West
Bengal make a variety of masks of
mythological characters that are
used during folk festivals by the
Chhau dancers of both Orissa and
West Bengal.
79PAPER CRAFTS
80LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAInstitutional AssistanceDevelopment measures that would increase and improve productionare urgently needed. Craftsmen require assistance in refining and
improving their techniques, gaining access to good quality raw materials
and development of new designs.  These artists need access to credit,

direct marketing channels, and protection of their interests by ensuring
adequate wages and socio-economic benefits.The FuturePaper-craft objects are mainly created by people either for

their personal use or for a limited clientele with whom
they are in touch. The items are disposed of through thefollowing marketing channels:
 sale at residence
 local fairs or seasonal 
melas weekly 
haats or bazaars
 hawking
 local shops
 exhibition-cum-sale
 export
Except for papier
-m‡chÈ 
items made by the mastercraftsmen of Jammu and Kashmir, no other paper-craft

item appears to have found a market abroad. Besides the
export and urban markets there exists another large market
which caters to the needs of the millions of rural and poor
urban consumers.Many of the paper crafts
described above use recycled
materials and hardly use any
chemical or harmful substances.In a world now growing conscious
of the need to preserve the planet,
paper crafts and our Indian toy-
maker have a lot to teach.Product designers, designinstitutions and development
corporations need to apply
themselves to study the needs
of this developing craft. After
all it is still the toy-maker and
the kite-maker who bring joy to
thousands of children in India!
81PAPER CRAFTSPaper-cutting: a Disappearing ArtOne of the few accomplished exponents of the disappearingIndian art of paper-cutting ó devasthankala or 
sanjhi ó Prabal
Pramanik has single-handedly built a bewitching repository of

his art in the hills of Himachal Pradesh.In Mathura, Brindavan, Bengal and Orissa, where Vaishnav
communities lived and enriched the lore of Radha and Krishna,
this rare art manifested itself in different schools through sharp
silhouettes and stencil forms.The forms cut out in devasthankala take little time but it
requires years of patience and practice to ìattain the skill of
cutting out balanced compositions without the aid of drawingsî,
Pramanik says as he deftly shapes a charging bull.A unique feature of paper-cutting is that the design to be cut
is never traced out.ìOnly superb neuro-muscular coordination, a sense ofbalance and composition, knowledge of anatomy and proportion
enable the ëustadí to lift his work to a high level of perfection.ìPaper as a medium was cut, folded and fashioned to produceeverything  from animals to pirates,î he recollects.
ìThe hours passed silently and day by day this world of paperwidened in form and vision through new experiments and
experienceÖ The depth and diversity of this world has allowed
pieces of paper to fill the vacant moments of my life and added
an innovative touch to my imagery.î
He says it flourished in the community of Vaishnavas for
hundreds of years. ìUstads or masters plied scissors and sharp
cutting blades, creating amazing art works to decorate temples,
nat-mandirs and 
kirtan sabhas during Vaishnava festivals like
Ras, Janmashtami and Jhulan.ìI have experimented with composition, using the basictraditional techniques, and have proved through my work that
this medium or art is just as flexible as water colour, oil or

tempera in its diversity, depth and rhythm.îñ Extract from a report in 
The Times of India
81PAPER CRAFTS
82LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.Many motifs and designs painted on paper productsreflect the immediate environment of the craftsperson.
Pick three examples from different parts of India to

illustrate your answer.
2.Originating from Kashmir, 
how has papier-m‡chÈ beenadapted in Bihar, Rajasthan and Kerala?
3.Looking back at your childhood, describe three objects
made of paper that you either bought or created.4.Craftsmen need assistance in refining and improvingtheir techniques, gaining access to good quality raw
materials and developing new designs. These artists
need access to credit, direct marketing channels, and
protection of their interests by ensuring adequate wages
and socio-economic benefits. Prioritise the above issues
and devise a strategy to address some of them over a
period of five years.5.Find out the word for paper/clay/stone in at least fifteen
Indian languages.6.A hundred years ago Kashmiri shawls were exported in
large papier-m‡chÈ boxes. Find other examples in which

two or more crafts compliment each other.
7.Design a series of paper-cut stencils capturing
contemporary life and ideas.82EXERCISE.............................
