All children love to paint. Through this activity they discoverthe shapes and colours of the world around them. Men and
women, through the ages, found satisfaction in creating
multiple forms through colours and textures to tell their
own special stories. The human impulse to paint is related
to the need to 
communicate, express and make sense ofthe world around.The subject of painting is, in fact, the painting. It canbe the expression of a mood, a reality as seen by the artist,
a graphic interpretation of a philosophical idea, an
invocation of blessings from the gods, or just decoration
as part of a celebration. It can be done by an individual, a

group, or a community, using different grounds, colours,
adhesives and tools. In India, community painting reflects
the identity of a region or a particular culture and follows
common characteristics.Why Snakes?ìWhy do traditional paintings, particularly in Gondi and Mithila
art have so many artistic and respectful representations of
snakes?î
This was a question asked by a German visitor

at an art exhibition in Frankfurt.
ìSince there are usually many snakes in thefields and in our village, we propitiated them
in this manner to prevent ourselves from being
bitten,î the artist from Mithila explained.ìWestern society is aggressive and would
think only of attacking the snake, but in a
spiritual and non-violent society like India, this
was a beautiful way of living with nature,î
responded the German visitor.
She was so inspired, that she bought all thesnake paintings at the Indian stall at the
exhibition!There is a marketing lesson to be learnt here.
PAINTING 9Kalighat painting,West Bengal
Mithila painting, Bihar
98LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWhat Is a Painting?The following are the basic physical components of apainting:!ground on which the painting is done!colours that make up the painting!adhesive or glue!tools to apply colours to the groundColours and images often represent meanings and concepts. Red and
yellow are auspicious. The Panchavarna murals are in five coloursó
red, yellow, green, black, blue. A fish depicts fertility. Find out how

colours from traditional paintings affect people.Mordant is a fixing agent
used to fix colours on to
cotton cloth during the
process of printing,
painting or dyeing.Ground on Which the Painting Is Done: Right throughhistory in India, rock faces and caves, walls of the home,
the floor, the threshold, a palm leaf, a piece of wood, cloth or

even the palm of a hand was used as a background to paint.In English many terms for paintings refer to the ground.Have you heard of canvas painting, fabric painting, glass
painting, wall painting also called ëmuralsí, or even face
painting? The ground determines what colours, adhesives,
and tools should be used. Wood has an oily surface therefore

water-based paints 
cannot be used.In India we have many imaginative names for each typeof painted surface in all our languages.Colours That Make Up the Painting: Colours for a paintingcan be organic or inorganic depending on how they are
obtained or made.The ground for painting can
be as varied as a wall (top
left), the floor (extreme left),
or even the body of an
elephant (left).
99PAINTINGOrganic Colours: Infinite colours provided by nature fromflowers, leaves, stones and even cow dung or soot collected
from inside a chimney fill the artistís palette. Common

colours for cloth in use even today are:!indigo laboriously obtained from the indigo plant to createmany hues of blue!madder red with powdered bark and leaves!dried karaka flowers with powdered alum and water for
an ochre yellowThese are only the basic colours whereas each region usessome special materials from its own area to add to this
common natural colour range.Before chemical colours came to be produced industrially,people sought to bring vibrancy into their lives by using

colours extracted from nature. Each region had its own
materials and mixtures which people used to create
aesthetic moods. Also, the instinctive urge to honour nature
and to capture it without destroying it inspired people to
search for colours in the natural world. Traditional wisdom

everywhere enabled people to experiment with available
natural resources.Dyes: Natural dyes have been used since time immemorial toadd colours to cloth. It was India that first invented the

technique of printing or painting on cotton cloth by using a
fixing agent termed a ëmordantí. The most common type of
mordant used is myrobalam which is made from unripe karakafruit and mixed with fresh unboiled milk. The cloth is bleached
with sheep or cow dung dissolved in water before it is dyed.Inorganic Colours: Inorganic or chemical colours such asarcylic, emulsion etc. came into existence as a result of
industrialisation. They are commercially sold and since
they are easily available, they are widely used.
Respect for All That Is NaturalIn Mithila painting of Bihar the artists are instructed to:! use only fallen leaves and flowers
! not use edible material
! never take anything from a neighbourís garden

100LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAAdhesive or Glue: 
A painting is said to be permanent if an
adhesive is used to fix it to the ground. For centuries, in
western countries (Europe), oil was used to fix colours and
the paintings were called oil paintings. When water is used
it is called water colour paintings.Adhesive or glue fixes the
colour to the ground.Resin extracted from trees is usedas an adhesive agent.Tools to Apply Colours to the Ground: Painting is donewith a variety of implements or tools made from natural
materials such as:!thin sticks stripped from long grasses!brushes made of birdís feathers, squirrelís and catís hair!bamboo slivers buried in the ground until they becomefibrousPainter, Jharkhand

101PAINTINGDid you know...
!Royal families engaged artists to create paintedbooks or manuscripts to illustrate poems and
stories. Great libraries of hand-written and hand-
painted books were collected by rulers and kings.
Often royalty had their own portraits made to adorn
their palaces, and illustrate their diaries, like the
Akbarnama
 and 
Jahangirnama
. To paint delicate
strands of hair and details of flowers in Mughal
manuscript paintings, the artist used brushes with
a single tail hair of a squirrel.
!Miniature artists in Jaipur can paint your portrait asif in a Mughal miniature setting? Can you create such
a painting yourself through cut-outs, artwork or by
learning from an artist?Textures are obtained by using combs, toothbrush andleaves. The effect of a spray of colour is made by blowing
coloured organic liquids through a blower.
One Painting for Each Day: In India we have manyimpermanent forms of painting like rangoli and 
alpana that
are created on the floor and at the entrance to the home.
Coloured powders are used to colour the rangoli on the ground
without an adhesive or glue as the art work is not meant to
be permanent but done each day. There are special designs
for festivals, to celebrate the birth of a child, or a marriage.Kolam: the floor paintingmade by women at the
entrance of their homes
with white rice powder in
Tamil Nadu
102LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIACloth PaintingMaking a Kalamkari: Kalamkari or vrathapani from Andhra
Pradesh demonstrates the variety of natural materials usedto create a work of art. Kalamkari means ëpen workí inPersian and refers to both printed and painted cloth. In the
seventeenth century Persian influences led to artists
experimenting with the depiction of trees, fruits, flowers
and ornamental birds.Using a Kalam to Paint: 
The painting is made exclusivelywith a pen, the kalam made out of a bamboo sliver wound at
one section with wool and then dyed with natural colours.
Black ink is used to make outlines, and jaggery, rusted iron
filings and water are used for making colours to fill in details.Painted Stories: The art of painting stories on cloth islocated in Sri Kalahasti, a town in Andhra Pradesh.Originally large
paintings on cloth
served as pictorial
renderings of the
great epics, the
Ramayana and the
Mahabharata for
temples. Paintings
were also made to
illustrate spiritual
poems of eminent
writers.
103PAINTINGThe process ofpainting the cloth
and the fineness of
the lines depends on
the artistic talent of
the painter. Great

skill is also required
in laying the colours
on the cloth, careful
washing of the cloth
in flowing water,

sprinkling water on it
regularly to ensure
colour fastness, and
drying it suitably in
the sun.The making of akalamkari is a
strenuous process,
which, if done
carefully accordingto the prescribed methods, produces a painting in which
the colours retain their brightness and vigour for centuries.What is most interesting is that this cloth paintingprocess involves no chemical product and the excess dyes
that flow into the rivers while washing do not pollute it. A
kalamkari artist once working on a painting in New Delhi
preferred to return to his hometown to dye the cloth,
because he felt the River Yamuna was too polluted to enable

him to bring out the richness of colour that he wanted.
The quality of the water, air and sunshine are all-important

in the process of art-making of this nature.
104LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWall Painting
The tradition of wall paintings has been passed down frompre-historic times to us today. As society moved from forest
dwellings to agricultural-based communities, the art of
painting continued as a part of their life and to transmit
their traditional beliefs through their art.This forms part of the universal culture of mostagricultural societies. Paintings are done on walls to invoke

the gods to bless the soil, keep animals healthy for work in

the field, grant a family healthy progeny after marriage,
and bless a newly constructed home.Paintings found on the walls of religious buildings depicta human quest to understand a larger universe and power.
India has the largest number of art forms, call them
styles or schools, anywhere in the world, mainly because
itís cultural heritage is rich, many-layered and a vibrant,
living one.Is It New, Old or Timeless?
The aborigine art of Australia reflects the traditional way of lifeof the aboriginals. The people lived in difficult natural
surroundings and began by using walls of caves or the barks of
trees to paint. They painted their own world of sacred objects,
animals, birds and images from daily life. It was both ceremonial
and secular just as is Indian tribal art. Many of their paintings
represent dreaming in some manner as the images have a magical
and mystical quality. The style of using many coloured dots and
lines to build up an image is remarkably like the art of the Gond
adivasis of Madhya Pradesh.
Wall painting, Kerala
Aborigine art,Australia
105PAINTING10,000 Œ 8000 BCE
Prehistoric paintings in rock sheltersand walls of caves show early life and
activities of human society.1Œ1000Buddhist viharas or monasteries and
chaitya or prayer halls in Ajanta in
Maharashtra, Alchi monastery in
Ladakh, and in Bagh in Madhya
Pradesh have murals depicting the
life of Buddha and other religious
stories.1000Œ1700Wall paintings can be found in the
temples of Kailashnath Temple of
Kanchipuram in Tamil Nadu.
Recently wall paintings were found
in the Brihadesvara Temple of
Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu. Early

examples of Jaina paintings were
found in Sittanavasal in Pudukottai
District of Tamil Nadu. At
Virubhadra Temple in Lepakshi are
examples of the Andhra style of
mural painting.1600Œ1900Mural paintings also adornedpalaces. Excellent examples are
found in Bundi, Jaipur and Nagaur
and the fortified palace in Patiala in
the Punjab.1900Œ2000Mural paintings continue today inmany of our village communities
especially Bihar, Maharashtra,

Rajasthan and Gujarat. Artists
of today, like Jatin Das and
M.F. Husain, have created paintings

for contemporary building interiors.Wall Painting through the Ages

106LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWall Painting
In a wall painting or mural, the ground is the wall orthe stone of the cave. Paint is applied on to the wall
plaster. To bind the paint to the plaster the colours are

often put on wet plaster so that it fuses with it.In many villages in India women apply wet lime paintto the dry mud walls. Lime is a natural disinfectant
and prevents ants and termites inhabiting the walls.
As they use no adhesive the paint flakes and has to be
redone every season, especially after the monsoons just
before Dussehra and Diwali.All paintings done on walls are not necessarily calledmural paintings. This term is usually reserved for
classical styles used for temples, churches and palaces.
Sometimes these are called fresco paintings. An example
of fresco painting is the mural technique revived from
pre-historic cave paintings in Wynad, Kerala. It has
religious and historical epics as subjects. The colours
and costumes are related to the performing arts. Yellow

ochre, red ochre, leaf green, lamp shoot and lime white
colours are applied in layers from light to dark. These
paintings do not spoil when exposed to natural elements.
The internet will help you find the locations where
Kerala murals can be seen.Children studying wall painting

traditions, Rajasthan
107PAINTINGMarketing Means More than Just SellingIndian contemporary art has attained international recognition.
Earlier pioneers from the Shantiniketan school and artists like
Amrita Sher Gill drew upon Indian colours and themes. The
work of these artists fetches lakhs of rupees at auctions and
sales in the international market.It is worth considering why communities that practise theirown traditional art forms are barely known and earn very little
compared to contemporary artists.One answer is that a single painting of an individualís uniqueexpression is worth more than many paintings on similar themes
by many people. It is the simple law of economics that defines
supply and demand.Secondly, individual, urban art explores new themes whilecommunity art prefers to repeat traditional subject matter
connected to seasons, celebrations, festivals and popular legends.Community art was painted on walls and floors.  A change in
building materials and lifestyle aspirations created surfaces in
homes that could not be painted upon. Here, the skill and
practice of community paintings declined, and along with it the
knowledge and connection with a heritage. Community art is now adjusting to presenting itself in different
ways for commercial activity. There are interesting examples of
how different traditional art forms can be adapted to new surfaces
and on to three-dimensional products which can be sold...
...Paintings traditionally applied to walls are now done on boxes
or trays or fabrics of different kinds. Traditional folk painting has

even been used to illustrate story books or make animation films.An important aspect of appreciating the cultural heritage andart forms of different societies and communities is to learn that
adaptations must not distort the art form so that its origins and
meaning are lost.An appreciation of the culture, the meanings and significanceof particular motifs, and a basic respect should be the foundation
for adaptability.These are all aspects that add value to traditional art worksand help in fetching better prices for its practitioners. At present
the difference in commercial value between contemporary and
traditional paintings is considerable. A painting done in a traditionalstyle represents the heritage of a community and region. It gains
value when the person buying it knows about its special cultural
meaning and characteristics. It also helps to see the artist at work
and appreciate the painstaking manner in which the work is done.Exercises in raising awareness about such art and beingable to tell the difference between pure forms and hasty

attempts at ësellingí folk art will certainly raise its value to

deserving levels.ñ JAYA
 JAITLY
, Activist for the Rights of ArtistsArtist, Jharkhand
108LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAStyles of PaintingWarli tribals of Thane district in 
Maharashtradecorate their house walls with paintings
depicting their lives: planting saplings,
carrying grain, dancing, travelling to market
and other routine activities of their daily
lives. Symbols of the sun, moon and stars
along with plants, animals, insects and birds
show their belief in the integration of all
forms of life.On ritual and ceremonial occasions Warli
home walls are plastered with dung. Rice
paste is used with red ochre powder to tell
stories and to invoke the blessings of their
goddess of fertility, Palaghata.Artists in Chittorgarh, Rajasthan make
wooden temples with doors that can be opened
up to reveal elaborately painted stories of
historical or religious importance. These
wooden kavads are used for worship and onfestive occasions.Tanjore Painting is an interestingcombination of art and craft that
grew in the region of Thanjavur,

Tamil Nadu under Marathainfluence. The main colours are red,
yellow, black, and white. The
distinctive features were
aristocratic or religious figures
adorned with jewellery and
surrounded by elaborate architecturalarches and doorways. 
Originallydone on wood, it is encrusted with
semi-precious stones. Later the
paintings were executed on glass.
The glass
paintings are
coloured from
outside inwards.
The outlines and
final touches
have to be done
first since the
artist paints the
picture from the
reverse side of
the glass.108L
IVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAAlmost every state and agricultural and tribal
community of India has its distinct painting
style, and some have more than one.
109PAINTINGThe jharnapata-
chitra of 
West
Bengal is a longvertical paper
scroll used to
tell stories from
religious epics.
The a
rtistscompose songs
that they sing
while they slowlyunroll each scene of the painting. Oldfabric is pasted on the back of the scroll
to make it stronger. These village story-

tellers travelled from village to village
listening to news and passing on
information much like television today.
The Gujarat earthquake of 2001 and the
tsumani of 2004 inspired such singer-

artists to present ballads of these
natural disasters.The patachitra of Orissa depicts stories
from the famous poem, the Geet Govind,and devotional stanzas by ancient poets,
singers and writers. The pat was earliermade as a temple offering. Stories are

drawn in sections on palm leaf as
etchings or as paintings on paper and
silk. Deep red, ochre, black and rich blue
colours from minerals, shell and organic
lac are used in these paintings. Modern
developments have encouraged them to
paint on wooden boxes, picture frames
etc. for contemporary use.109PAINTINGMithila painting, popularly known asMadhubani art is from the district of
the same name in Bihar and is now
well-known all over the world. Women

decorate the nuptial chamber and the
inner walls of their homes to
celebrate festivals. The
return of Ram from exile and
Krishna playing with gopisare the preferred subject
matter. Artists often show

scenes of nature, an
abundant harvest, tantric images of snake
worship, and even city scenes if they have
visited one.Any traditional art can be adapted tocontemporary subjects. Recently the United
Nations in India decided to display Indian folk
paintings for the eighth Millenium Development
Goals programme for which Madhubani artists
Satya Narain and Moti Karn created a beautiful
expression of prevention of child mortality by
showing how elephants and other animals
protect their young ones.Painting on the Palms of Hands:
Henna or mehndi, is used to createauspicious symbols, motifs and
designs on the hands and feet on

festive occasions. It is part of the
creative Indian urge to paint as a
form of community worship and
celebration rather than an
individualistic exercise of pure
self-expression in which the artist
then needs to market the results
for survival.
110LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.Choose any one type of painting (wall, miniature, book
illustration) and describe its development over the
centuries.2.Search the Internet and identify two examples of wall
painting from other parts of the world.3.In the World Heritage Site of Ajanta the paintings are
disappearing because the plaster on the stone walls is
falling off due to water seepage and the humidity caused
by the breath of thousands of visitors. How can we
preserve and protect crafts objects made of cloth, stone,
wood, paper, fibre and metal?
4.Marketing means more than just selling. Explain and
give reasons.5.In India we have permanent and impermanent forms of
traditional painting. In a museum/art gallery what are
the ways of preserving and restoring paintings? What
can be done to preserve the knowledge and skills of
impermanent forms of art?6.Market forces demand that the craftsperson adapt thecraft to meet contemporary needs. Find examples toshow the negative and positive influences of this
market requirement on the crafts, skills and on the
crafts community.7.In your region find out the traditional names given to
colours, when they are used, and the social significance

of these colours.8.How would it look if traditional Indian art were used on
bus stops, school buildings, railway stations or even
on furniture to propagate awareness of our traditional
art? Give your views on this. Suggest other methods of
promoting such awareness.110EXERCISE.............................
