2CLAY
The art of pottery is probably as old as human history. Noother art traces the story of human beings on this earth as
clearly as pottery does. The tides of time have washed away
many civilisations but evidence of their existence remains
in fragments of pottery.There are two reasons why this is true: the first is thatclay is found in abundance in practically all parts of the
world; the second is that clay objects are the least perishable
of all materials.The history of pottery tells of the daily life of humanbeings, their death and burial, of human migration, trade
and conquest, cultural practices and influences.As to the discovery of how clay could be manipulated to
make pottery, it is easy to imagine how, as prehistoric
communities walked through rain-soaked mud, they noticed
their footprints and how these impressions became
hardened by the wind and sun. Exactly when human beings
intentionally used these discoveries for making pottery is
unknown but it may have been invented independently in
many parts of the world.However, the process of making a pot is a long and
difficult one that has evolved over many generations of

trial and experiment.What is Clay?Clay is universally found as it forms part
of the earthís crust that developed due to
weathering over thousands of years. In India
different types of clay are found along
riverbeds and banks, lakes and ponds, and
agricultural lands. Clay is essentially silica
but the varying mineral content in clay adds
to its colour and determines how suited it
is for different processes.Clay is cleaned by removing large stonyparticles, gravel and humus.PotsPotter shaping ahorse-head
16LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPotteryArtists, through the ages, have loved clay as it is the mostsensitive material on earth for it captures the slightest
touch or the gentlest imprint. As soon as the clay object is
dried or fired, a chemical change occurs and the object

becomes rigid and is no longer sensitive to touch.Clay of some kind or the other can be found almostanywhere in the world. India, too, has an unbroken
continuous history.  Artists have used clay to produce

objects for the home ó cooking pots, roof tiles, clay bricks
and sculptures.
Oh! the pot is everywhere!
Where there is buttermilk, in the cupboard, a pot
Where water is stored, at the waterstand, a pot
Where food is kept, on the stove, a pot
Where there is jaggery, in the attic, a pot.
In the heart of the home,

As ëgotrají, ancestors, a pot
Vastu, during house warming,

At the threshold of each home, a pot
Where a marriage ëpandalí is built, a pot
When the ëgarbaí dance takes place,
In the courtyard, a pot.
During sickness,
Left in the outskirts of the village, a pot
At every stop in a pilgrimage, a pot
In death, at the cremation ground, a pot
At a ëYagnaí representing the planets are pots

In the village square, the singer plays a beat on a pot.ñ from Prakriti, 
Indira Gandhi NationalCentre for the ArtsWhen clay is mixed with water it becomes malleable, elastic. Thinner
clay solutions can be created to use as paint for walls and on
sculptures.ƒBy controlling the amount of water that is mixed with clay
it can be used in different ways.It can be made into a creamy compound that can be poured  into
moulds and allowed to set.It can be mixed to a leathery consistency and cut like a sponge.When dry the surface can be scraped off as fine powder.
Straw and grass can be added to create a strong, rough textureideal for the creation of very large images.So each artist treats clay differently to suit the type of object that is tobe created.
17CLAYClay objects 
are prepared using two basic techniques:wheel-turned pottery
hand modelling.A variety of processes within these two techniques haveevolved.Wheel-turned Pottery
The earliest method of making pots for storage may have
used the coiling technique. The artist rolls out strips of
clay and then places one coil upon another, joining them

together with his fingers to form a hollow pot.A potter at his wheelThe most important change came withthe invention of the potterís wheel. There
are many kinds of wheels used in India
today. The first is a simple flat stone or
wooden disc that is turned with the hand
or a stick. By placing a soft lump of clay
on the centre of the disc and turning the
wheel the potter can change the shape
of the clay. By varying the pressure of
her/his fingers and palms she/he can
create a pot of different sizes and shapes.
By pushing with her/his thumbs down
into the centre of the ball of clay and
pulling gently outward and upward the
shape of the hollow pot takes form.Another type of wheel is mounted on avertical shaft. By extending the shaft and
adding another disc at the bottom it is
possible to turn the wheel with the feet,
leaving both hands free to make the pot.
Today even motorised wheels are used.Finally, smoothen thecoils from the insidefor good binding.
Roll a coil withoutstretched fingers.Join and add coils to forminteresting patterns.
18LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAHand ModellingModelling is a process used with materials like clay, waxor plaster.ƒClay modelling enables the 
artist to work from
the inside core to the outside. The artist begins with a well
mixed lump of clay and starts working with his fingers to
give it shape and form.ƒClay can be rolled, coiled, pinched
and attached to the main form. This technique has several
advantages that the artist can use to create a sculpture.
He can add legs and arms to the figure by wetting a smaller
piece of clay, rolling it and attaching it to the main body.The process gives the artist freedom to change, modifyand repair areas at will. If, for example, the nose of the
figure falls off, the artist can just wet the clay piece and
stick it back on to the face. He can then continue to add
smaller details of hair, bangles and necklaces in clay.
Decoration: Clay offers endlesspossibilities to create textures anddesigns on the wet surface of pots,
which can be pressed or imprinted,
cut out or added on like appliquÈ and

then many parts of the clay object can

be assembled together to forge acohesive whole.Painting: After firing, the craftsperson
can pour a slip, which is the thin liquid
solution of clay that gives the clay
object an even colour. The sculpture

can be painted with mineral colours
to add value to its appearance.
Sometimes clay objects such as pots,
diyas etc. are also painted.
What Is Terracotta?Once the clay object is made, it can be dried in the sun andfired in a local kiln made of cowdung and wood. This process
transforms the clay into terracotta. Clay can be fired at
different temperatures from 700ñ1400 degrees C. The intensityof heat and the type of firing gives the terracotta its colour
and hue that range from dark brown to lively reds.Once fired, the terracotta becomes insoluble, un-plasticand durable. On firing, the clay loses its chemically
combined water, and becomes hard and almost 
imperishable.That is why 5000-year-old seals from the Harappan

Civilisation still exist.Terracotta: Firing a clayobject in a kiln transforms
the clay into terracotta.Clay figurines, West Bengal
Making clay masks
19CLAYMaking of Giant FiguresTraditional potters live and work in almost every part of
India. Pottery is a specialised profession and often thecommunity lives together in a separate section of the villageor town.Each potter or kumhar has the skill to create hundreds
of pots for different uses ó from huge storage jars for grainand water, to tiny oil lamps for Diwali. He can design a
childís toy and sculpt giant figurines for worship as well.To make giant figures, artists have evolved varioustechniques. One of them is to make each piece of the figureon the potterís wheel. This is to prevent the clay figurinefrom breaking when it is fired in the kiln. When clay isfired, it contracts considerably owing to the loss of waterand moisture. A solid model made of ordinary clay wouldburst under the pressure of the heat of the kiln. A sculpturewith uneven wall thickness would warp and crack.Therefore, using the potterís skill in creating parts of thefigure in which the walls are of even thickness is a uniqueway of overcoming this problem.The potter throws clay to create the hollow shapes oflegs, body and neck of the figure he wants to create. These
individual pieces are then assembled by the potter to createthe required form. The four pot-shaped legs are attachedto the hollow torso. To this the artist adds bits of pinched,pressed and coiled clay for decoration.This unusual processinvolves the imaginativeuse of the material and agreat deal of inventivenessgoes into making the formboth technically sound andaesthetically satisfying.Some of these votivefigures are two metreshigh and their toweringpresence only adds to the
genius of the villagepotter. Potters make these
figures for their patrons in
lieu of money or food.A craftsman finishing anAiyanar horse
20LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA3000 ñ 1500 BCEHarappan CivilisationSmall figures 
of animals, 
domesticatedanimals like the bull and the ram,
tiny images of house animals like a
bird in a cage, cats, lively Indian
squirrels munching on a juicy nutToys for children similar to the claytoys made for children today by the
village potter and sold at the haatsor  village bazaar like the bull with a

movable nodding head300 ñ 100 BCEMaurya and Sunga PeriodsClay figurines from excavations atPataliputra, the ancient Mauryan
capital, Kosambi, Gaya and other
important sites of the Mauryan and
Gupta Periods100 BCE ñ 300 CEKushan PeriodIn the northwestern region of Indiathe Greco-Buddhist stupas were
often decorated with stucco designsand motifs. There are several
Gandharan heads with evidence of
paint. Strong red mineral colours
were used for the lips and black
charcoal hues for matted locks and
curly hair.
Clay through the Ages
21CLAY300 ñ 1000Gupta and Post-Gupta PeriodsLife-size terracotta sculptures wereused to decorate temples and secular
buildings.1600 ñ 1800Local rulers of Bishnupur in West
Bengal  built temples in a unique style

that were profusely decorated with
terracotta plaques and stucco patterns.ƒ1900 ñ 2000Despite colonial exploitation the potterhas continued to innovate and work.
Every village, town and city in India
has a vibrant living tradition of pottery
that is unique to its tradition.
22LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAVotive terracotta figures are made in 
MadhyaPradesh and 
Chhattisgarh
. In Bastar, on
amavasya (the no moon night) of 
Bhadrapad(August to September), tribals offer terracotta

bulls, tigers, elephants and horses, sometimes
with one or two riders, to the goddess whom
they worship for wealth, health and protection
from evil spirits. These clay animal gifts or
votive offerings have replaced the practice of
animal sacrifices of earlier times.In Tamil Nadu
 the dramatic larger-than-life
size image of Aiyanar, the local deity, is

surrounded by a sea of attendants, horses and
bulls.  They serve as
 gram devatas 
who standat the entrance of the village and protect it.Giant Clay Figures of India22LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
23CLAYDuring Durga Puja in West Bengal
enormous figures of the goddess are
created. The artists use different
techniques and mixtures of natural
materials to make these excellent statelystatues. They follow the traditional
practice to create the inner core with local
grasses bound together to form the legs,
arms and head. The grasses are often
swathed with thin cotton cloth. Then layer
upon layer of clay is carefully applied to
the body of the goddess to gradually build
it up. Over a period of several days, each
layer is allowed to  dry completely so that

no cracks appear and there is no warping.
Once dry, the entire figure of the goddess
is painted with natural mineral colours.
After this the figure is dressed in a sari
and adorned with jewellery made of paper
or artificial jewels, and garlands of
flowers, before it is ready for worship.Ornately decorated clay horses, hugearmies of terracotta figures and assemblies
of village deities with their attendants can
be seen under the trees in village grounds
in Bankura District, West Bengal.
Mati kahe kumhar se tu kya raundhe mohe,Ek din aisa ayega main raundhoongi tohe.ñ KABIR23CLAY
24LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.No technique emerges in a day. In any craft a technique
is sharpened over centuries. What do you think were thevarious stages that pottery-making went through that
led to the use of the wheel in pottery? Describe in detail.2.In many parts of India water is stored in clay pots.
What aspects of the design and material of a suraheeor matka make it suitable for storing drinking water in
summer?3.With reference to the photographs given below,
identify the different techniques used by the artist
to create each.24EXERCISE.............................PlaquePotV
otive object4.The history of pottery tells of the daily life of humanbeings, death and burial, of human migration, trade
and conquest, cultural practice and influence. Survey
ten houses in your neighbourhood and create a table of
various pottery objects found there giving information
regarding when they are used, their shape, how they
are used and from where they were obtained. Especially
refer to the daily life, rituals, trade and transport in
the surveyed households.5.The invention of the wheel had a profound effect on
every apect of human life. Explain the many uses of
the wheel and how each has changed human life and
culture through the ages.6.Why, do you think, pottery is a specialised profession
from the point of view of skill, tools, techniques and

entrepreneurship?7.On the Internet, search for new uses of clayóin
industry, in homes, in science, in space travel etc.
8.Artists, poets and writers, through the ages, have used
the image/metaphor of pottery. Find examples to
illustrate the concept in Indian art and literature.
Create your own poem using clay as a symbol.
