All of us enjoy decorating our bodies.In ancient times it was believed that
besides enhancing its beauty,
decorating the body gave it
additional strength and power. Even

today many tribal societies use
flowers, wild berries, leaves and
feathers for this purpose. Flowers
and fruits celebrate nature and
growth while feathers are valued for
their colour and for the power of
flight. Seeds, even wings of insects such as
colourful beetle wings are used as embellishmentand decoration.One of the oldest forms used in jewellery wasthat of a sphere, representing the seed, the bija.Later a range of beads were made from clay, glass,metals and precious stones. This symbolised
fertility, growth and the origin of life.
Many jewellery forms made in metalreproduce forms of flowers and fruits.
Champakali is a necklace made of jasmine bud
motifs and is worn throughout India.  Karanphuljhumka is a combination of the form of an open
lotus at the ear lobe and a suspended half open
bud.  Mangai mala is a rich necklace from Tamil
Nadu, with stylised mango forms studded with
rubies. Precious metals such as gold and silver
were for the rich while the less affluent used
even brass and white metal.  Gold was

associated with the sun, and silver, 
chandi, withchandrama ó the moon.
In the past when there was discrimination onthe basis of caste, only the upper castes were allowedto wear gold. This is now changing and those
who can afford it, wear gold and precious jewels.5JEWELLERY
Strings made of differenttypes of seeds
50LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAMeaning and Significance of JewelleryIn some tribal societies, each ornament was a symbol ofthe rank and status of the wearer, and it was also believed

to have certain magical powers. Thus, the purpose of
ornamentation was not only to satisfy an instinctive desire
to decorate the body, it was also invested with symbolic
significance. This aspect is clearly expressed in the form of
amulets which carry inscribed prayers to protect the wearer
from evil influences. All communities and faiths use this
form of jewellery as protection against harm or to activate
certain positive qualities.It was with the establishment of a settled agrarian societythat jewellery became a form of saving and a symbol of

status.  A variety of designs in folk jewellery evolved over

the years, and the important position of the jeweller in
village society also points to the fact that jewellery was
considered as the only form of investment which could be
encashed during an emergency.It was mandatory for married women to wear  jewellery.
Necklace, earrings, head ornaments and bangles were
essential for every married woman. It was only widows
who were deprived of jewellery.Jewellery for Every Part of the BodyEach region in India has a particular style of jewellery
that is quite distinct. Differences occur even as one goes
from one village to another.
Despite the variety in jewellery patterns in
different parts of the country, the designs in each
region are also at times strikingly similar.
Head and Forehead: Women wear the 
bore resting
upon the parting of the hair in Rajasthan and parts
of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh, whereas the tikka,a rounded pendant at the end of a long chain which
falls on the forehead, is used throughout India. The
shringar patti which frames the face and often
connects with the tikka on the top and the earrings
are also used widely. In earlier times men wore the
kalgi, a plumed jewel, on top of the turban.
Nose: The ornament worn all over India hasvariations from the simple lavang, clove, to phuli,the elaborately worked stud, or nath, the nose-ringworn in the right nostril, and the bulli
, the nosering worn in the centre just over the lips.Streedhan: From Vedic
times onwards, jewellery
was counted as a womanís
wealth and comprised a part
of her inheritance from her
father, as well as a gift from

her husband.Ornaments worn by a
Bhartanatyam dancer
51JEWELLERYNeck: One of the ornaments is the guluband,which is made up of either beads or rectangular
pieces of metal, strung together with the help of
threads. A ribbon is attached at the back to
protect the neck of the wearer. Then there is

the longer kanthi
 or the 
bajaithi.  Below this is
worn either a silver chain or a necklace of beads.
The men would wear a charm or a tawiz at the
neck and a kantha, a long necklace.Fingers: For the hands there are a number ofrings.  On festive occasions women wear the

hathphool or 
ratthan-chowk to decorate the 
back of the hand.Wrists: 
For the wrists there is the
 kada
, the paunchi, thegajra and the 
chuda, which quite often extends six inchesabove the wrist.Arms: 
The bazoo, the joshan
, and the bank are worn above
the elbow. Men wore a heavy kada or bangle.
Hips: A series of silver chains formed into a belt are wornat the hips and are generally known as kandora or kardhani,
while the men would wear a silver or gold belt.Ankles: Solid, heavy metal anklets combine with thedelicately worked paizebs ending in tinkling, silver, hollow
bells, while men would wear a heavy silver anklet. Only
royalty wore gold on their feet.Toes: The bichhua, scorpion ring, for the toe is put on bywomen at the time of their marriage.Jewellery for variousparts of the body
52LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAJewellery through the Ages3000ñ1500 BCEHarappan PeriodIndia has an unbroken tradition of over
five thousand years of jewellery making.
The excavations at the Harappan site
have uncovered beads and shell bangles.
The shell bangles are exactly similar to

the ones worn by married women in
Ladakh. Gold sheets shaped into head
bands were also found.300 BCEñ300 CEThe richest collection of jewellery wasdiscovered in Taxila, an important
Buddhist centre of learning. It was on the
trade route, as well as the road for
migration of people entering India.  Here

the jewellery exhibits Greek influence and
the introduction of new technology such
as filigree and granulation.It is interesting to observe, however,
that there are marked similaritiesbetween our present-day jewellery
designs and the jewellery of the
Sumerians and the early Greeks.A necklace excavated at Ur, which is
made up of finely designed pendants of
lion-heads with granulated work, and
supposed to have belonged to Queen
Bathsheba, has a remarkable likeness to
the garuda necklace prepared in Kerala.
Early Greek jewellery has a closesimilarity with some of the traditional
jewellery of Kutch and Saurashtra. The
patterns of some Egyptian jewellery,
especially armlets with snakeheads, are
found in India, as well.400 CEThere is a close similarity in thejewellery design of today with those of
early times. This we know from
descriptions in literature, and in the
depiction of jewellery in sculpture and
painting.
53JEWELLERYThe kanthi, a necklace worn close tothe neck and the phalakhara, a long
necklace comprising a number of
tablets strung with a series of beads,
is seen in the early Gupta period
and is found in use even today in

most parts of North India. The
chudamani, shaped like a full-blownlotus with many petals, was worn
at the parting of the hair and is
similar to the present day bore ofRajasthan.In the Ramayana, there is mentionof Sita wearing a nishka necklace.
Nishka, a gold coin, is also referredto in the Jataka stories. The
tradition of wearing of coin
necklaces continues.900 CEThe use of the nose ornament wasintroduced into India quite late, as
the early sculptures and murals do
not show nose ornaments.  It

appears to have been introduced by
the Arabs  after the tenth century

and, over the years, it became
common all over India and became
associated with marriage.1500ñ1900The Mughals had fine jewellery andused large precious stones. Jahangirís
treasury, described by Sir Thomas
Roe, an English traveller, had 37.5

kilograms of diamonds and 3000
kilograms of pearls and rich jewellery,
often colourful enamel jewellery
embedded with precious stones.1900 onwardsWith body piercing becomingpopular in the West, young Indian

men and women have begun
piercing not just the nose and ear,

but their tongue, the navel and
other parts of the body to wear
jewellery.About 26 per cent
of Indiaís exports
comprise gems
and jewels.
54LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThough all the hill jewellery of Kullu andKinnaur Districts is made in Hoshiarpur
in Himachal Pradesh, it has its ownparticular style. The pipal patra, madeout of bunches of heart-shaped silver
leaves fastened to an enamelled piece of
silver, is worn in these areas by women

on both sides of their caps. It frames their
faces with the light shimmering in
cascades of silver. Their necklaces are

formed out of large metal plates,
engraved with the traditional designs of
the region and filled with green and
yellow enamel. The most common design
is of Devi riding her lion.The nose ornaments of Kullu are alsohighly specialised. The large-sized nathand boulak designs of a single leaf are
not to be seen in any other part of
India. On festive occasions they
wear a large nath, oftenlarger than the face
of the wearer.
The belts worn in Andhra Pradeshhave intricate clasps of the double
head of a rakshas or 
kirtimukha.Another pattern of a kara, which
is common in Andhra Pradesh, is
that of serpent-heads which appear
to be holding the earth in their
mouths. The necklaces often derive
their designs from shapes of grains.The jewellery of Kashmir is quite distinct.
The most important are the ear ornaments,
known as kan-balle, worn by Muslim
women on both sides of the head. They
comprise a number of rings, which are
attached to the hair or the cap. This
jewellery is also worn in Ladakh and other
Himalayan areas such as Lahaul, Spiti,
and Kinnaur.
In Punjab, women wear a specialornament, chonk. It is cone-shaped and isworn at the top of the head with two
smaller cones, known as phul
, worn at thesides.Despite the fact that styles in jewellery have, on
the whole, tended to develop region-wise, we find
that certain distinctive forms have been developed

by specific sections, groups or areas.Regional Varieties of Jewellery

55JEWELLERYIn Assam the tribes patronise silver jewellery, while
in the plains gold jewellery is preferred. The patterns
of gold jewellery are extremely delicate. The jewels,
though few, are finely finished. The earring, known
as thuria, has the form of a lotus with a heavy stem.The shape reminds one of the traditional kamal
earrings mentioned in ancient literature. Thuria is
usually made of gold and studded with rubies in the
front portion as well as at the back.The folk jewellery ofOrissa  in silver and gold
is rich in patterns, forms
and designs. The most
popular  technique is

filigree. The traditional
filigree work is robust in
character and distinct
from what is being produced commercially today in
Cuttack. Very few head ornaments are worn in Orissa.

The accent is on arm jewels, necklaces, nose-rings
and anklets, with the finest designs found on nose

ornaments. One design known as maurpankhi, iscrafted like a peacock with open feathers, made withthe processes of granulation,
filigree and casting.In Sambalpur, brass jewellery
is common. Bangles in different
patterns are polished daily and
appear to be made of gold.Kerala has a very rich
variety of gold designs. The
use of precious stones is not
so common here. Variety is

seen mostly in necklaces.The garuda necklace
produced here bears
testimony to the fine
workmanship of the
craftsmen of the area.In Tamil Nadu
, silver filigree armlets worn by Vellalars
of Coimbatore District have excellent workmanship ingranular work.Chettinad jewellery, made of uncut rubies, is one of thefinest. The addigai is a necklace made of a string of uncutrubies set in gold. A central motif of the padakam imitates
the lotus. The mangai-malai is a necklace of mango-shaped
pieces studded with uncut rubies and diamonds. The plaitcover often has at the top the head of a naga or snake.
The jewellery of the Todas and the Kotas of the Nilgirisin Tamil Nadu, are very distinctive.In West Bengal
, the  filigree
work on gold and silver
jewellery is extremely
delicate. The finest pieces of
jewellery are the hair
ornaments like the tara kantaand the paan kanta ó hair
pins designed like a star and
a betel leaf.CE
56LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAMeenakari or Enamel Work
One of the most sophisticated forms of jewellery developedin North India is meenakari. Jaipur is the main centre,but some craftsmen practise this art in Delhi, Lucknow
and Varanasi as well.
Meenakari is combined with kundan to produce a delicateand rich effect. The meenakari or enamelled patterns are
so fine and intricate that they need to be examined with a
magnifying glass. This tradition continues even today.
A step-by-step description of how the techniques ofmeenakari and kundan are combined to make exquisitejewellery is given below.1.The shape of the jewellery is first created.
2.The jeweller cuts out the sections where precious stones
need to be inlaid.3.It is then handed over to the 
meenakar who fills the
sections with lac, fixes it on a stick of lac, and outlines
delicate designs of flowers, foliage and birds.4.After making the outline, the entire area is engraved
for filling the enamel colour.

57JEWELLERY5.To contain each colour different compartments are
created. Within the enclosed, tiny compartments, lines
are engraved to hold each colour and also to reflect
light, since many of the colours are transparent.6.After this the colours are filled in and fired in a simple
clay oven at maximum temperature.7.Colours which require a lesser degree of heat are then
filled in their respective compartments in the design
and fired again, until the whole piece is worked with
enamel on both sides.8.Then the piece is given to the 
kundan worker, who
heats it on warm ashes and fixes the stones in the
empty spaces, which had earlier been cut to shape.9.A fine gold filling, shaped to the size of the opening and
intended to hold the gem in place, is then heated and
fused to the base of the piece.10.The finished piece is then polished with a soft leather
cloth till it glows. The beauty of the meenakari ornament
lies in the combination of elaborate patterns in enamel
with the lustre of precious stones.The uniqueness of the meenakari ornament lies in the
fact that even the back of the piece is elaborately decorated,
though it will only be seen by the wearer.

58LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe Edge of Tolerance
Following is a poem ëAn Amethystí by a school student whichdepicts the hardships in the life of a gem-cutter.
I am an imported amethyst from Africa
I can see the difficulties of my shaper
His age is 39 years.
And he had been working from the age of eight,
The machine is his own and cost him 250 rupees
It looks to me as if he is being killed by degrees
Shaping an amethyst on a wheel,

With his B.A. degree packed with a seal

Sat Shaldir Ahmad, the stone cutter
He was oppressed but no cry for help could he utter.

Late to bed and early to rise,
He wakes at five and sleeps at 10 oí clock in the night
Concentrating to shape me, the right size
Due to this process he weakens his eyesight.
This was the work his father Sammu Khan
Had to do
And his grandfather Illahi Achan did the same work,
His children go to a school
He wants them to read and write
And not like him be in a plight.
The labour is one rupee per carat
He gets 1000ñ2000 rupees in a month
For all his hard work, no part time job he can do
The machine might be his, but the seth owns the Factory.
The uncut amethysts like me are imported,
After being worked at they are exported.
Itís not because the foreign workers are slow,
Itís because the cost of our cut amethysts are low
Because the workersí pay scale is low.
How hard he works, how little he gets,
How hard he struggles, but, alas! He fails.
This is my tale,
This is my story,
You for yourselves can now

Understand a workerís sadness and fury.Bangles and the Bangle-makerIn Firozabad it is a familiar sight to see people on bicycles,
wheeling handcarts or cycle rickshaws which are piled high with
brightly coloured bangles. They are either being taken to peopleís
homes for completion or back to the factory for refiring.Within homes also known as ëjudai addasí, the bangles gothrough the stages of  jhalai
, judai and 
katai. The bangles comein large bunches of 312 bangles, of which 12 bangles are reserved
for breakage.Uncut amethyst
59JEWELLERYThe first stage is jhalai. This work is done by the women
and children in the family. Four to five members sit in their
one-room house, which serves as their living, sleeping and
working area. The roof and the walls of this room are absolutely
black with thick soot. The soot comes from the kerosene lamps
that are used in their work.In front of each person are 10 ñ12 small kerosene oil wicklamps placed in a semi-circle. Each bangle is then held by both

ends and the middle is heated over the flame. The heated bangle
is then placed on the ground and gently pressed to align the two
ends. Care has to be taken to ensure that there are no burns
either from the flame or the heated bangle.These aligned bangles are now taken over by the men or olderboys for the next stage which is that of joining the bangle or
judai. In this process the two ends of the bangles are heated overa kerosene and acetylene flame. The ends are pressed together
and the flame melts the glass enough to join the bangle and make
it a complete circle.In both the stages of jhalai and 
judai the workers suffer the
risk of being burnt besides straining their eyes. Cramps, pain in
the joints as well as severe backache are some of the other
problems faced by these workers.The joined bangles are now ready for the katai addas. Thecarving is done on a fast revolving wheel on which designs are
etched into the glass. During this process it is very common for
the worker to get cut on the wheel or get flying glass particles
into his eye. This is accompanied by aches and pains including
a strain on the back.Gold coating is the next step that the bangles go through.Here a solution of pure gold and chemicals is poured into the
designs etched on the bangles, giving them an elaborate look.
During this stage the workers handle all the raw chemicals
without wearing any protective gloves or aprons.As the gold solution is very expensive, the workers have to bevery careful in handling it, so as to minimise wastage.The bangles are now sent back to the factory for refiring, whichgives them a sheen. These are put individually on a tin tray and
placed in a furnace. They have to be pulled out to check and
recheck if the process is complete. The workers run the risk of
exposure to excessive heat, burns and heat cataract. Finally the
bangles are sorted out and packed in boxes.ñ FEISAL ALKAZI, MARTHA
 FARELL and
SHVETA KALYANWALA
, ëThe Danger W
ithiní
60LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.Designs translate natural forms into symbols. What do
you think were the sources of inspiration and symbolism
of the following. (Example: Bija or seed represents
growth, fertility, prosperity.) (a) Mangai mala, 
(b)Shikhar of a temple, (c) Dome of a mosque, (d) Wooden
tribal pole, (e) Kumbha or pot, (f) Kite.2.It is said that in Rajasthan a woman carries all herwealth on her body in the form of jewellery. This is one
of the ways of investing wealth. What are the other
ways of conserving oneís wealth?3.It is difficult to decide whether it is folk jewellery whichhas influenced urban jewellery, or vice versa. There is
no doubt, however, that many of the forms like the 
bore
,the har, the hathphool, the gajra, originally developedin folk jewellery were later adopted by city jewellers
who refined them by using gold and precious stones.
Do you agree? Argue your case giving examples of
contemporary male and female jewellery fashions in
your region.4.It is interesting, however, to find that children of all
castes and communities wear the hasli as it is supposed
to protect their collarbone from dislocation. What dochildren of your community wear and what is the
significance of each piece of jewellery?5.Until recently designs in clothes and jewellery of thepeople all over India were governed by their particular
caste and the community to which they belonged. Doyou think this tradition is changing, and why?6.Investigate the occupational health hazards in different
aspects of jewellery production, as for example in
meenakari work or in the bangle industry. How can
this be addressed?7.A recent Hollywood film called 
Blood Diamond describes
the political conflict, exploitation of children, and
slavery involved in the mining of diamonds in Africa.
Write a poem or story on a related theme based on your

observation/experience/research.60EXERCISE.............................
