Fibre made from the edible banana plant is used in weavingthe traditional Japanese fibre cloth called bashofu. Thecloth is smooth, stiff and is used in making the kimono,the traditional Japanese dress.The craft of extracting fibre from the banana plant,spinning the yarn, weaving it into cloth and patterning the

cloth was a highly valued craft of the Okinawa Islands.Japan has an ancient tradition of crafts that wererenowned throughout the world for their elegant
sophistication. World War II, rapid industrialisation and

urbanisation in Japan, in the last century, threatened this
artistic heritage. The younger generations were hesitant
to continue the family traditions in the twenty-first century,
the age of computers and television.It was then that the government started a new schemeand great artists, who excel in the area of crafts and
creativity, are honoured with the title of ëLiving National
Treasureí in Japan. Scholars, visitors and students are

encouraged to explore, research and study with these
masters. This is a wonderful example of how today the
Japanese value their craft traditions and honour the great
practitioners of crafts.How This Craft StartedCommunities living in diverse climates and harsh terrains
have creatively responded to the challenges of their
environment by transforming locally available natural
fibres to create a large variety of objects necessary for
their survival.The ingenuity of community artists created a great varietyof natural fibre products. The products range in both scale
and form ó from large architectural creations of homes
and shelters, suspension bridges and fences to smaller
objects: baskets, mats and hand fans.
The bamboo and cane crafts of the North Eastern regionof India represent a large storehouse of forms and traditional6NATURAL FIBRES
A traditional Japanesekimono
62LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAwisdom. The forms of several baskets have evolved as aresponse to function, as seen in examples such as the open-
weave baskets of Mizoram which are flexible and allow the
person to carry firewood, while the close-weave baskets of
Garo hills in Meghalaya are used to transport and store
rice grains. Other forms of baskets have been determined
by culture or in responses of different communities.What Is a Natural Fibre?Natural fibres made of cellulose or plant matter can be
obtained from almost every part of the plant such as the
root, stem or shoot, leaf, fruit and bark from many tree
species (see following table).Fibre can be extracted from a leaf which is fibrous,pliable, strong and green. If the leaf can be wound around

a finger without breaking, then it indicates a potential
source for making fibre.Fibre: filament or threadof a natural or synthetic
material that can be
spun into yarnBanana fibreKhus fibre
Sisal fibre
BambooKora grass
JuteHempWater hyacinth

BananaKauna reed
Cane palmMoonj grass
SarkandaWagoo
 reed
Sikki grass
Cannabis/pullaWickerBhindi
NettleFlaxArhar/Pigeon peaPalmyraPalm datePalm coconut
Arecanut palmSisalBananaPineappleScrew pineRootStemBranchLeafFruit/SeedWillowCottonCoir
ArecanutKhusBeauty of Natural FibresNatural fibre products have certain distinctive qualities:they share a common language of colour, texture and of

belonging to the earth. The appearance, feel, and texture of
a bamboo basket is clearly different from that of a plastic
bag. No two bamboo baskets are of the same colour while
they could have the same form. A woven surface, like a
reed mat, could have many shades of white or brown.
Leading fashion houses today search for such beauty as
lies in asymmetry, irregularity and natural warmth.
63NATURAL FIBRESQualities of Natural FibresDifferent fibres have varying physical properties of strength,appearance, pliability, colour, texture and fragrance.
Traditional skills and knowledge of working with these
materials is an economic activity, often undertaken as an
additional activity, to earn a little extra income when there
is a break in the agricultural cycle of work.RootsKhus or 
ramacham in Malayalam (Vetiveria zizaniodes
) isthe aromatic root of a densely tufted grass. The grass has
a thick root system which helps in checking soil erosion. It
is thus an excellent stabilising hedge for stream banks,
terraces and rice paddies. Khus grass grows wild in many
states but is cultivated in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab,
Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh.Khus is known for its fragrance and cooling properties.
The roots are used for making mats, beds, and pads for
desert coolers. The dried stems are used for making brooms,
fans, hats and footwear, and for thatching.
StemsA great variety of baskets, mats and floor coverings are
made from grass and reed fibres which are referred to in
local languages as moonj, sarkanda, kora, sikki, chipkiang,madur kathi, rice straw, 
kauna reed. Reeds grow naturally
in marshy land and in ponds.Kauna is the local name for a reed or rush belonging to
the family Cyperaceae which is cultivated in the wetlands
of the Imphal valley. It has a cylindrical, soft and spongy
stem which is woven into mats, square and rectangular
cushions and mattresses by the women of the Meitei
community of Manipur. The raw material for the craft is

obtained by simple processing wherein the reed is cut near
the base of the plant and dried in the sun. It is also smoked
if it is to be preserved and stored for a longer time. The
mats are woven by interlacing the stalks with jute threads
using basic and simple tools. The mats and cushions have
a unique edge finishing which is done by hand.Fibres are obtained by shredding or peeling parts of plants, or pounding
them to make threads or by cutting them to make strips.Fibres from plants pre-date cloth woven from yarn spun from cotton.Ancient communities must have used natural fibres to build shelters
and thatched roofs.Unfinished reed mat,Manipur
64LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAKorai (Tamil Nadu) or kora (Kerala) also of the 
Cyperaceaefamily is a sedge or wetland plant which is cultivated in the
southern districts of Tamil Nadu. The stems are cut near
the base of the plant, spliced vertically and dried in the
sun. On drying the spliced stems curl into a smooth and
tubular form. A large variety of matsówith stripes,
geometrical motifs, natural and dyed coloursóare woven in
several districts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala. The mats are
woven on horizontal floor looms. The ribbed natural coloured
mats are popularly used as floor coverings.
In Midnapur District of West Bengal, another type of reed
similar to kora called 
madur kathi (Cyperus corymbosus) iscultivated, harvested and processed. Finely spliced 
maduris woven into mats that have a central field enclosed by

patterned borders. The weavers ingeniously use two subtly
differentiated natural colour splits or selectively dyed parts
of the splits to differentiate the borders with dyed colour.

Both the loom and the weaving technique used are very
basic but require the use of manual skills and craftsmanship
rather than sophisticated equipment and technology.Unlike the woven mats, shital pati or ëcool matsí madeby the plaiting technique are made in Assam and Tripura.

The mat has a smooth and lustrous surface. The murtaplant or (Maranta dichotoma) is harvested when green,washed in soda water and dried. It is then boiled and sliced
into strips for plaiting the mat.In Uttar Pradesh and Bihar women make baskets usingthe technique of coiling. These compact containers are made
for local use with spliced moonj or sikki grass stalks. Thetrays and shallow containers are used to store foodgrains

and flour. 
Moonj baskets with multi-coloured fibres and
bold patterns are made for a daughterís trousseau.
In the Madhubani District of Bihar, women make
figurines of deities, animals and birds  for ritual and

everyday use with 
sikki or golden grass used in combination
with multi-coloured dyed stalks. The imagery of these forms
echoes the folk art of Mithila, the cultural region on the
northern banks of the Ganges.Strips obtained from the palm leaf are also used to makecoiled baskets and containers in Haryana. A bunch of moonjgrass fibres forms the core material of the coil and a palm
leaf strip is wound over the coil and binds consecutive
rows of coils in place.Furniture items such as the mooda or stools are examplesof elegant products made entirely from natural fibres such
as sarkanda and 
moonj. Sarkanda is a wild grass found inHaryana and its long stems are used in making the
indigenous mooda.A kora mat weaver on the
traditional loom, Tamil NaduShital pati, AssamMat weaver separating the stemof the sedge or kathi from the
leaf stalk,West Bengal

65NATURAL FIBRESBamboo is a giant tree-like grasswhich mostly grows wild in the tropical
and sub-tropical regions of the world.
Bamboo is significant as a renewable
resource that is found abundantly in
India. These tall grasses have straight,
woody and cylindrical stems, which
have nodes. Some stems are hollow and

some are solid. These cylindrical stems

or culms taper at the top. The nodes at
the top have branches with leaves and
flowers. Bamboos grow closely in
clumps. There are 136 species of
bamboo in India. The botanical name is
bambusae. Bamboos grow quicklyó60mm to 200mm in a day and some

species grow up to 900mm in a day. It
is a widely used material that is hardy,durable, economical and biodegradable.Bamboo is used whole as well as splitin different widths to make a large range
of products. Simple tools like a dao or
bill-hook knife or wide-bladed knife are
widely used for making splits. Bamboo
has long fibres running along its length
and the bond between the fibres is
relatively weak while the fibres
themselves are extremely strong. This
structural characteristic affords easy
splitting along the length.Local communities use thischaracteristic in an appropriate manner
while devising different products.Jute, a stem or bast fibre, iscultivated in West Bengal. Jute cloth is

brittle and deteriorates with exposure
to sun and rain. It has been popular as
inexpensive packaging material. In the
craft sector, today, there is a renewed

interest in finding innovative
applications of jute such as fashion
accessories, bags and wall panelling
using macramÈ, crochet, braiding and
other non-woven techniques.Detail of a contemporary wall
panel made with jute yarn usingmacramÈ or knotting techniqueBast fibres are generally
long fibres. Consequently
they are used in making
yarn  and weaving cloth

66LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAA large variety of baskets, containers, mats andfurniture are made from the leaves and stem of trees
and plants belonging to the palm family.Palm trees are commonly found in the coastalregions of India and some varieties like the date palm
grow in semi-arid regions. While coconut, arecanut
and date palm trees have feather like leaves, the
palmyra or toddy palm has fan-like leaves.
The local population of coastal Tamil Nadu isknown for judiciously using every part of the palm
tree for a wide range of applicationsóthe trunk is
used in local architecture and for making rafts; the
leaves are used whole as roof thatch and wall panels
while strips are woven into baskets, winnowing trays
and for packaging fish and jaggery. Palm oil and
palm fruit are edible products.Boxes made of palm strips for various usesAn artisan making strips of thepalm leaf by inserting a knife
in the leaf fold and separating
the leaf from the midribA palm-leaf craftsmanís house, Tamil Nadu
67NATURAL FIBRESCane is an important forest producefound mainly in north-eastern parts of
India. It is cylindrical and of uniform
thickness, solid and brown in colour. Its

properties of being tough, flexible and
elastic have made whole cane suitable
for use in furniture, hats, walking sticks,
fishing rods and baskets. In Arunachal
Pradesh even suspension bridges are
made of cane. Cane splits are used for
tying and binding, and are especially used
for finishing the rims and edges of baskets
due to their smoothness and pliability.Canes are long slender stems ofclimbing plants which belong to the palm
family. India has about 30 species of cane
growing in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
the Andamans, Nagaland, Manipur,

Mizoram, Meghalaya, Kerala, Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu.Cane-and-bamboo suspension bridge over atorrential river in Along, Arunachal PradeshA shallow circular basketmade from whole caneCane furniture madeby skilled craftsmen,Nagaland
FruitThe coconut palm tree alsohas multiple uses of itsstem, fronds, fruit and nut.Coir fibre extracted fromthe outer husk of greencoconuts is spun into yarn
and ropes while the fibre ofbrown coconut is used asstuffing in mattresses.
Coconut husks have to beretted or steeped in water to loosen them from the tough
husks. Coir producing villages are located in the backwaters
habitat of Kerala which abound in the skills of processing
and spinning coir and of weaving coir floor coverings. White
coir extracted from the green husk is of superior quality
and withstands salt corrosion. It has wide-ranging
applications, for instance, in ship-building and for making
floor coverings.LeafThe screw pine is a tropical plant known for its soilconservation properties. It is grown as a hedge or as a
boundary wall in Kerala. It is available in abundance and
provides a source of income to rural women who make
strips from the leaves to weave mats. The leaves are also
used as roof thatches. Strips are interlaced diagonally toweave mats and large surfaces that are
then cut and sewn to make containers,
bags and hats.There are male and female speciesof the screw pine. The female screw
pine produces a finer quality of fibre
used in weaving traditional mats called
mettha pai which are soft and cool to
sleep on. The male screw pine produces

coarser fibre. In Thazava in Kollam
district of Kerala, double layer mats

are made which are edged with a vivid
coloured strip used to stitch the layers
together. The white mat is burnished

with a stone that gives it a polish.The coconut palm tree
grows wild.The pinnate or compound leavesbeing woven togetherCoir fibre
All the World in a Basket
A basket, that common object of daily use, canpowerfully affect the sense and mind ó somewhat
as the contemplation of a grain of sand can lead
to insights on the nature of the world.What appeals first is the visual texture, thatdistinctive aspect of baskets, arising from this
definitive quality of being woven. We delight in

the patterns and textures made of rope, leaves,

grass, rushes, sticks or twigs or other similar
material. We may instinctively run our hands over

the surface: an understandable reaction because
texture, whether physical or visual, is a quality
of surface.On seeing baskets we feel one with humanity:however rich or poor or highly formally educated or illiterate

we may be, from virtually any part of the world and, indeed,
from almost any era ó we can relate to the basket. Together
with pottery, basketry is one of the oldest human crafts.

Gathering material from the natural environment, and making
from it a receptacle useful for the storage and transportation
of objects; a receptacle designed for ease and comfort of use
as relating to the human anatomy ó what an act of creative
transformation this is!
However, our admiration of the quantities of the design is
often directed at a group rather than an individual ó who
knows which anonymous craftsperson added an innovation
which was later refined, preferred and adapted by many?
Particular types of baskets do gain associations with particular
regions and cultures, such as the conical basket of the apple
gatherers in the Kullu valley, and the basket of the Kangri pot
which could even be regarded as a symbol of Kashmir.
Another human and social point is an economic one: whenone buys a traditional basket it is more likely
that the sale would benefit not a factory owner
or company but an individual who is possibly
not wealthy and is working with a greater
degree of autonomy such as by being a member
of a cooperative.Baskets may be considered desirable todayfrom an ecological point of view, being made
from fast growing plant materials used
without much processing (hence saving
energy). The production of baskets does not
require energy ó and resource-rich factories
or processes; and baskets are bio-degradable
and hence less polluting.ñ DEEPAK
 HIRANANDANI, The Times of India,
28 May 2001Traditional bamboo
craftspersons, OrissaBamboo craft practised byboth men and women is a
traditional and hereditary
source of livelihood for
several people in the states
from Gujarat in the west to
Assam in the east, and
Uttar Pradesh in the north
to Kerala in the south.69NATURAL FIBRESFunctional products made ofekra bamboo by the Khasis
of Meghalaya
70LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWorldwide Use of Natural Fibres
The importance of papyrus, a fresh water reed in ancientEgypt is evident from its primeval origins. Papyrus is a tall
flowering reed and its use is functional and religious and
was part of the mythology of ancient Egypt. Papyrus hadmultiple usesófrom paper for manuscripts to papyrus boats
that were the lifeline of the River Nile, sails were made
from the bark, seams of the larger wooden boats were

caulked with papyrus, rigging was made of papyrus fibres
and papyrus flower was a sacred symbol of the pharaohs.The Mbuti Pygmies living in the Ituri forestsof Equatorial Africa are hunter-gatherers
known for their knowledge of plants for

multiple usesóas food, shelter, 
medicine,furniture, weapons, poison for hunting, as
cloth and dyes.Eskimos in Alaska and
communities in the islands of the
Pacific Ocean such as Tonga,Samoa, Hawaii, Papua NewGuinea, Fiji and 
New Zealand,produced bark-cloth by a

repeated action of beating strips
of bark of the fig tree. When the
strips are thin, several strips are
taken together and beaten into
a large sheet. Sometimes starch
was applied in parts to join the
strips. Tapa or the barkcloth of
Tonga is painted using a stencil
that is cut from the midrib of
the coconut frond.The grasslands of South Africaprovide material for coiled basketry
while wetlands provide reeds and
rushes for mats; deserts are the home
of agaves or succulent cacti, tropics
for palms and cultivated land for
straw.In Europe, North America and
Alaska mats are made of grass, rush
and sedge; baskets are made from
split wood, shoots of hard wood trees,
willow, wicker and barks of trees.
71NATURAL FIBRESIn the tropical and sub-tropical regions ofAsia, Africa and South America, thejungles are a rich source of bamboo and
cane, which provide bamboo and leaves
for building shelters, tools and implements
for agriculture, fishing and the daily needs
of settled communities.In the cold and temperate forests of NorthAmerica and 
Europe, the barks of the birchtree and hardwoods of deciduous trees are
used as slats in basketry.Coiled basketry made of grass
fibre or palm leaf fibre is found
in Morocco, East Africa, India,Ghana, Mexico, Bolivia,
Guatemala and 
islands of thePacific Ocean. Ceremonialbaskets and headwear are often
formed by techniques such as
coiling, twining, plaiting and
are embellished with feathers,
shells, coins and a bold use of
pattern and colour.
The use of bamboo in Bangladesh,Burma, South-East Asia, China and
Japan is very extensive and is integralto the culture of the East.Japan has a unique sensibilityfor bamboo that is reflected in
the forms of traditional
architecture, fences, craft, art

and textiles. It is a craft
tradition that values the pristine
quality of nature, studied
simplicity and excellence in
craftsmanship.
72LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.All cultivated plant materials as well as those found inthe wild in our forests are potentially renewable
resources that can be used for a large number of
applications if their use by humans is moderated in a
sustainable manner.
 Compare and apply the principle
of sustainability in three craft traditions ó stone, metal
and natural fibre.2.In your opinion what differentiates plastic objects from
objects made of natural fibres?3.What are the qualities and properties of natural fibres
and how have these properties been used in craft?
Explain with examples.4.Refer to the Internet and describe the use of natural
fibres in one Asian country.5.The conversion of forest land into agricultural and
industrial areas has led to problems for the bamboo
crafts community in India. Develop ideas that can help
solve these problems.6.Draft a scheme that you would like to start in India to
elevate our craft traditions and honour the great
practitioners of crafts.7.What is the impact of the intrusion of plastic ware into
rural and urban homes? (Think of the following: the
rural economy, traditional crafts and skills, environment
and health.)8.Unlike clay and stone, basket-making 
is not a full-time
profession. Compare and contrast and give reasons why
this is usually the case.72EXERCISE.............................
