Even today the stone carvers of Tamil Nadu begin with aprayer that first begs forgiveness from Mother Earth for
cutting the stone. The prayer ends with offerings of sweets
and milk to the earth and a solemn promise never to misuse
or waste stone.The stone cutter starts by locating a good stone quarry.
Then begins the process of cutting what he needs from the
mother rock. Metal pegs are hammered in a straight line
into the rock at intervals. Water is poured on to the rock to

wet it. The change in night and day temperatures causes
contraction and expansion and the rock gradually slits
along the straight peg lines into perfect slabs.The most interesting part of the creative process is whenthe artist chooses the stone piece to work on. How does he
decide which is the perfect piece of rock to use? What
qualities of the rock does the artist look for ó colour or
grain or texture, or the softness or hardness of the stone?
Can he ëseeí the image within the rock piece? Can he
imagine what its form will be or can he tell by touch how it
will feel when it is completely carved?Types of StoneThere are myriad varieties of stone to be found in India.

Soft soap stone contrasts with the hard granite, an igneous

rock of the Deccan. Sedimentary rocks of the northern plains

of India produce a variety of coloured sandstones; and
metamorphic rocks, hardened over centuries under the soil

form marble and limestone.Rocks acquire their properties from minerals that givethem colour, lustre, and strength. Depending on how the

rock was formed, igneous or sedimentary, its molecular
structure enhances it with a grain, layers and patterns.Each type of rock, be it granite or sandstone, hasintrinsic qualities that the sculptor explores when he
creates a work of art. 3STONERelief sculpture, Halebid,Karnataka
26LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe nature of the stone will determine how the sculptureis made and also its possibilities. Soft soap stone allows
for delicate, intricate carving whereas sandstone, a fragile
sedimentary rock with layers of fine compressed sands and

grains, has to be handled with extreme care as it breaks easily.Within each category of stone there is enormous variety.Sandstone ranges from the golden yellow of Jaisalmer to
the soft pitted and speckled stone of Mathura and Fatehpur
Sikri. The sculptors of India have been using these stones
for the past five thousand years.The difference in treatment of one stone from another inthe hands of an artist can be seen in the granite sculptures
of Mahabalipuram and the sandstone figures of Khajuraho.
Hard granite stone was used in South India to make temples
and household items like grinding stones. The quality of
stone available in each region of India distinguishes the

style and form that can be created.CarvingOnce the stone is selected the measurements for rough-
hewing and cutting of the sculpture are taken. Carving is a
difficult process, requiring skill, concentration and extreme
caution. It is a process in which forms are cut away or
subtracted from the original solid material.Carving is a process inwhich forms are cut away
or subtracted from the
original solid material.Descent of Ganga in granite, Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu

27STONEA block of stone is carved by chiselling away tiny chips inorder to create the desired shape. Once the stone has been
carved the chips cannot be put back or replaced. This means
the artist has to have a precise and accurate idea of how far
to carve and what to remove. One cannot afford to make
mistakes in this process for once the stone is cut away or
carved it cannot be put back. Imagine the acumen needed
to plan in advance the shape of the face, the size of the
smile and the right angle of the jewel that will adorn a
carved image. Once the rough work is over, details are carved

with finer tools and then the stone is polished. Some stones
can be polished to shine like a mirror.
Types of Stone Works
Stone objects include household objects like bowls, plates, grindingstones, and pillars, beams and brackets for construction of houses.
Figures made in solid materials like stone are further classified into
categories that explain their technical dimensions:Relief-sculptured panelsThree-dimensional figures in the round.Low relief: Mahakapi Jataka,
Bharhut, Madhya PradeshRelief-sculptured Panels: A relief has carvings only on
one side. The carving can be shallow or deep while the other
side is flat and is usually embedded into the masonry work
of the building. A low relief can be 1ñ3 cm deep and high.
Relief can almost look like a three-dimentional sculpture.Three-dimensional Figures: Such figures can be viewed
from all sides. They can also be used to create free-standing
pillars like those erected
by Ashoka throughout
his empire in the third
century BCE.Three-dimensional figure:torso of Vishnu in redsandstone, Mathura,Uttar Pradesh
28LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAStone Sculpture through the AgesAt Bhimbetka in Madhya Pradesh, there are a number of
rock shelters of the Stone Age period. Early inhabitants
lived in natural caves and created fine tools and flints of
agate and other natural stones in the area. These tiny flints
and well-carved stone implements are the first examplesin the long story of Indian sculpture.At Ellora, in Maharashtra, there are Hindu, Buddhistand Jain rock-cut shrines. The Kailash temple at Ellora of
the ninth century is an entire temple that was carved out
of the natural hillside. The temple is really a massive
sculpture cut out of a single piece of the hill. The artists
started work from the top and carved downwards,
beginning with the  towering roof, the windows, the doors

through which one enters into halls with enormous
sculptured panels.View of Kailashnath Temple, Ellora
29STONESandstone panels withgeometric and floral design
were made to decorate palaces
and tombs during the medieval
period. The Mughals in the

sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries built some of the most
beautiful buildings in the world
like the Taj Mahal in Agra. The
sculptural decorations are of
many varieties ó marble jalisare made out of a single slab of
stone that is cut to create a
lattice window that allows for
light and ventilation.To make inlay marble or sandstone panels the artisthas to carve out the design in the form of compartments
on the flat stone slab. Then precious and semi-precious

stones are cut into exact pieces of the pattern and laid
into the compartments. The inlay work in the Taj Mahal is
so extraordinary that over twenty pieces of different
coloured stones were used to create a single flower.
Marble carving, Taj MahalJali work, sixteenth century, Sidi Sayyid Mosque, Ahmedabad
30LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAStonewareIn Madhya Pradesh the soft
marble rocks of Bhedaghat on
the banks of the Narmada
provide craftsmen with excellent
raw material to make carved
panels, figurines and boxes.The sculptors of Karnataka 
carveimages, panels of gods and
goddesses, ornaments, bowls, vases,
and book-ends from a variety of
stones available in this State.Rajasthan is famous for delicate jaliwork, for domestic architecture in
yellow and pink limestone and white
marble. Jaipur also produces stone
figurines.30LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
31STONEUttar Pradesh is one of the leadingproducers and exporters of stoneware in
India. Soft marble and soft streaked Gorahari
stone of many shades are inlaid with semi-
precious stones. Inlaid table tops, plates and
decorative items are produced in Agra.In Orissa the stone cutters of Puri work
mainly in soapstone. Harder stone is
used for temple building. Traditional

stone carvers in Mangalpur make stone
utensils from semi-hard grey stone and
add to it a beautiful polish. Grey stone
from Khichling are made into items for
the urban market, like  boxes and

containers, bowls and vases.Tamil Nadu: Famous stone
sculpture centres have been
established in many places such
as Mahabalipuram, where a
training school has trained a
number of young artists in
traditional stone-carving techniques

and in making statues.31STONESTONE
32LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAPatrons of CraftsAnanda K. Coomaraswamy in his book entitled The IndianCraftsman describes the craftsmen of India and Sri Lanka
that he had studied in the early twentieth century. He
divided crafts communities into the following categories.Those who lived and worked in the villageThose who travelled from village to village and townsThose who lived and worked in townsCraftsmen who were employed by the ruler in royal
workshops.The Village:
 The potter, carpenter, stone sculptor, mason
and goldsmith lived and worked often in their own homes
in designated parts of the village. Everyone in the village
knew their local craftsmen and therefore he had no need to
autograph his works. The jajmani system ensured thathereditary artisans were bound to the dominant agricultural
groups through traditional ties. This was a hierarchical
and symbiotic relationship, in which the artists worked
under the protection and hospitality of the landowning
class. When there was a festival, the landowner or the
jajman would request the potter to make ceremonial pots
and diyas and in return pay him in kind with food for the
rest of the year.  When his household needed a grinding

stone, the stone cutter would make one to the specified
requirement and size.Itinerant Craftsmen: Some artisans like the blacksmith
even today are itinerant craftsmen who move from village

to village servicing the community and spending as much
time as is required in each place. These crafts communities
were often paid in kind with gifts of grain and food, clothing
and money so that they did not have to cultivate land for

food but could pursue their craft to perfection.In the Town: While the artists in the village worked as a
family, individual artists in the towns formed guilds to protect
their interests and to ensure the quality of their work. The

guild protected the group and its occupational interests,

punishing the wrong doer, negotiating prices and enforcing

standards of work. The artist in the town was also paid in
kind and with land grants or produce from land.In the Court: Through the ages rulers tried to attract well-known performing artists and craftsmen like sculptors to
work in their court. It is the creations of such artists that
provide an idea of cultures and eras gone by. Rulers
understood that having brilliant architects and sculptorsMuch of Indiaís architectural
heritage, like the Ajanta
caves, was created by
artisansí guilds.Detail of an ornate pillar in
a landlordís house,
Chettinad, Tamil Nadu
33STONEwould enhance their empire in many ways. They knew thatthe creation of magnificent buildings, shrines and sculptures
would carry the message of their grandeur to distant places
and countries. This is why there are many royal records of
grants and gifts to artists who excelled in their work.The artist who attached himself to the court foundemployment in the royal workshops and was often a
privileged person, given payment for an assignment not only
in kind but also in land. The Jetavanarama Sanskrit
inscription (first half of the ninth century) of a Buddhist
monastery records that:There shall be clever stone-cutters and skilled carpenters in the
village devoted to the work of temple renewal. They allÖ shall be
experts in their respective work. To each of them shall be given
one-and-a-half kiri (in sowing extent) for their maintenanceÖ an
enclosed piece of land. And one hena (or a plot of dry land) shall be
granted to each of them for purposes of sowing fine grain.ñ Ananda K.Coomaraswamy, The Indian CraftsmanEmperor Akbarís royal diary records that payment wasgiven to artists for their work and special awards for
excellence were given on pleasing the emperor with the
creation of a rare object.The practice of gathering skilled artisans in the palaceworkshops and homes of rich landlords continued right
into the nineteenth century.In the east the princes and great nobles and wealthy gentry, who
are the chief patrons of these grand fabrics, collect together in
their houses and palaces all who gain reputation for special skill
in their manufacture. These men receive a fixed salary and daily
rations, and are so little hurried in their work that they have plenty
of time to execute private orders also.ñ George C.M. Birdwood, Industrial Arts of IndiaWho are the patrons of stone artists today? Is there adifference in how they are paid in rural areas
and urban centres? Is there any recognition of
their work? What are the problems that craft

communities face today? These are some of the
questions that have to be asked to understand
the health of the crafts sector in India.Growing Up as an ArtistLiving and growing up in a family of artists
enables a young child to acquire skills and
sensibilities from his/her parents and
grandparents. The child growing up in a potterís
home knows how to mix clay from childhood andChaitya Prayer Hall, Ajanta,MaharashtraTomb of Salim Chisti inmarble commissioned byAkbar, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra

34LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAis sensitive and familiar with the qualities of clay, knowing,for example, by its scent whether it is dry or wet or ready
for firing. The sensitivities developed through such

familiarity would seem almost natural and effortless.Critics of Indian art and craft have remarked that Indianartists rarely invented or experimented with tool-making
to improve their work, or to develop labour-saving devices.

Tools were kept to the minimum, while the process of
achieving perfection was as important as the job itself.
Skills practised for over 5000 years are still in use in India.
Today artists, whether they are stone or wood carvers,
potters or weavers, continue to work with the technology
and methods used by their forefathers.It appears that once a simple way of making somethingwas developed it lasted for centuries and became the most
uncomplicated way of achieving the real goal of crafts.

Perhaps finding time-saving devices, effort-saving
technologies was not the goal of crafts communities as is
illustrated by the experience of a well-known wood carver
from Kerala (see box below).He had studied with his father and has narrated how long and difficult
the training was. His family made wooden masks for Krishnattam, an
ancient danceñdrama of Kerala. He said that as a child he worked with
his fatherñteacher who instructed him on how to carve the mask for

the character of Krishna. He used simple tools, the chisel and the
hammer, and dif
ferent types of scrappers. His teacher kept telling him
to do it again and again. This went on for seven years! Finally, one day,
his teacher looked at his work and saw that his son had captured the
ëidea of Krishnaí, the bhava or
 inner expression of the deity in hiswooden mask. Through this lengthy process the son acquired not only
mastery over woodcarving but was able to express deep philosophic
ideas through his craft.In every region of India a
distinctive style of
architecture developed.
Lakshmi Narayan Temple,

Chamba, Himachal PradeshAt the turn of the nineteenth century when machinesand technical training were overrunning the old system,many scholars like Coomaraswamy wrote about the loss ofthis parental education and the discontinuity of culture
and living craft traditions.Ö for in the East there is traditionally a peculiar relation of devotionbetween master and pupil, and it is thought that the masterís
secret, his real inward method, is best learnt by the pupil in devoted
personal service, so we get a beautiful and affectionate relation
between the apprentice and the master, which is impossible in the

case of the busy professor who attends a class at a Technical school
of a few hours a weekÖñ ANANDA K. C
OOMARASWAMY
, The Indian Craftsman
35STONECoomaraswamy believed that by living and working withthe family the child acquired valuable trade secrets, an
understanding of the culture and customs to which they
belonged, the rituals and festivals for which their craft was
required and the philosophic traditions that transformed their

work into art. By attending festivals and rituals, listening to
grandmothersí legends and stories, the child learnt the content
of sculptures that he would make later in life. Such an
education is not available in technical or art schools of today.
It was this guruñshishya
 and parentñteacher system that led
to the continuity and excellence of Indian art.Contemporary DemandsIn Mahabalipuram the sculptors make certain figures which
they feel have a demand. They also execute orders received
from various organisations, like temples. There is a
preponderance of the so-called traditional iconographic forms:

gods, goddesses, the elephant god Ganapathy and the whole
gamut of religious figurines. The background to this is the
College of Traditional Art and Architecture where traditional

iconography and architecture is taught. They take on various
kinds of contracts for both the local and the export market,
especially tombstones for Korea and Japan.There exists now a burgeoning construction industryalmost all over the country. People are demanding more in
terms of ëfinishí to their houses than just plain cement
and concrete. They like to beautify houses with objects of
art both functional and aesthetic, traditional and modern.
Carved stone lends itself to both interior and exterior spaces.
It can be used in construction work, objects of art,
traditional and modern designs. Stone can be used in a

variety of combinations with other materials.Innovation comes in when there is an active interactionbetween customer/designer and the craftsman. The
craftsman needs to understand the requirements of the
client and the customer/designer needs to understand the
material, its capabilities and the capacity of the craftsman.Another important factor is cost. The craftsman wouldobviously like to make and sell something that can be made

as cheaply as possible and sold as dearly as possible. It is
important that the price worked out should be such that
the craftsman gets the maximum benefit at an affordable
cost to the client. A simple example would be carved pillars
for a portico. A range of styles should be available from
simple columns to carved ones so that they can suit the
taste and budget of the client.Contemporary pillar base(above) and sculpture 
(below),Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu
36LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.What are the inherent qualities of stone as compared
to clay? How do such qualities determine the techniques
that can be used on one material and not on the other?2.Compare the patronage structure of the past with the
present. How does this affect the objects created?ƒ3.Igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic are different
varieties of stone, each having its own properties. How
does the craftsman use these properties to advantage
in his craft? (Example: Granite, because of its hardness,has been used to create temples of lasting value in
Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu.)4.Coomaraswamy makes a distinction between classroom
learning and apprenticeship with a traditional
craftsperson. Compare your practical work in the field
with crafts communities with
 your experience of 
classroomteaching. Do you agree with Coomaraswamyís views?ƒ5.What do you think are the occupational health hazards
and environmental concerns around the use of stone
in crafts and buildings?6.The boom in the construction industry, with every
middle-class house boasting of marble floors and granite
counters, has led to depletion of stone resources. Draft
a Bill or write an article for the local newspaper keeping
in mind the following:protecting forest lands from quarrying and miningprotecting the rights of the craftsmen to access thestonesuggesting alternative materials to replace stone in
buildings.36EXERCISE.............................
