If you look around your home, you will find a number ofthings used everyday that represent the heritage of Indian
crafts. These may include:an embroidered cushion or pillow casea bamboo basket or chair woven with cane
a piece of jewellerya duree or carpet
a stone bowla clay pitcher or surahee, or a lamp or 
diyaa mat or a brooma handwoven sareeIt is quite possible that one or more objects in this listhave been replaced in your home by an industrial product.
If that has happened, you can ask your parents about what
they used before the modern object arrived.On the face of it, a broom or a mat, a shawl or ahandwoven scarf may appear machine-made. On the other
hand, you can find nylon mats in the market made
mechanically, which look exactly like hand-woven straw
mats. Unless you observe carefully you may not see much
difference between the two. However, there is only superficial

similarity between an object made by a craftsperson, and
its copy made by a machine. When people talk about
craftsmanship, they often have in mind machine-made
perfection. However, the kind of perfection a work of

craftsmanship represents is quite different from the
mechanical perfection of a mass-produced object.The difference comes from the traces of individualitythat you can find in a hand-crafted object. These traces
may look like marks of ëimperfectioní in comparison to the
mechanically produced object. For instance, in a handmade
bamboo fan, the surface may be rough in the part where
the bamboo had a knot. The natural texture of the bamboo
continues to ëliveí in a handmade fan. In a comparable
plastic copy of the fan, the surface will be smooth everywhere,Learning about Crafts

2LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAand every fan will look identical. Contrary to this uniformity,each craft product is different even if it looks similar to
others. A hand-woven sari has no exact match, just as a
handkerchief you make with your own hands is unique.
All traditional crafts are practised in communities, notindividually. The man or woman who practises a traditional
craft inherits it from senior members of the community,
usually while growing up in the family. The knowledgeand skills involved in any craft are diverse,
starting from basic knowledge about the
material with which the craft is practised,
the tools with which it is made, to the
numerous skills applied in order to transform
the material into a work of aesthetic beauty
and of daily use.
Let us, for example, look at a pitcher or aflower-pot. The material used for making it

is the most basic and perhaps the oldest
resource used for the practice of pottery as a
craft. The right kind of clay is first collected,
then cleaned and treated, and then turnedinto pots of desired shapes with the help of a potterís wheel.
Once a pitcher is given shape, it is fired in a kiln in order to

make it strong. In each of these stages, numerous skills are
involved. The potter must also maintain several levels of
awareness while applying his skill, in order to ensure that
the end product has its basic, reliable quality and beauty.Beauty and UseAesthetic beauty and usefulness need not be two separate
qualities. In modern times we sometimes feel that
something to be used in everyday life need not be beautiful,
or that something beautiful cannot be put to daily use. We

assume that if an object is to be used frequently, it need
not be delicate and graceful. This assumption is quite
mistaken in the context of traditional crafts. The best way
to understand why this is so, is by making something with
your own hands.
Try making an object of daily use in your life as a
student. If you have no experience of stitching and
embroidery, you can still try to make a small book mark,
by wrapping a small, rectangular cardboard with a piece
of cloth which has a design like a flower or a leaf
embroidered on it. In order to make such a bookmark you
will need to take several decisions. Each decision will draw
your attention in two directions: one, towards the choice
of cloth, its colour, the embroidery and its colour; and two,

3LEARNING ABOUT CRAFTStowards your own likes and dislikes in these matters. Whenyou start the actual cutting and stitching, you will go
through a series of thoughts and emotions. You will feel

pleased with yourself when the rectangular cardboard is
wrapped up and stitched tightly with the cloth you have
selected. You will feel somewhat irritated with yourself if

one of the corners does not look as neat and angular as
the other three corners do. Ultimately, when the work is
finished and the bookmark is ready, you will feel pleased
with yourself in a strange sense.This is an example which can help you appreciate howcraft products combine beauty with use. The imperfect piece
of work will look so intimate that you will look at its
blemishes, like a blunt corner, with affection. A sense of

personal relation with the object in hand will give it, in
your eyes, a beauty that more perfect-looking bookmarks
made of metal and plastic may not have. The secret lies in
the point that a craft product does not pretend to be perfect,
it only aspires to be perfect.
This is what makes it so human. As human beings, wetoo can only aspire to be perfect in whatever we do, but we
can never be perfect. Even the Taj, which is a great work of
craftsmanship, and is rightly regarded as one of the wonders
of the world, is not perfect. If you visit the Taj and look at it
carefully, you will find that it expresses a deep aspiration to
be perfect, even as it reveals many examples where the
individual sculptor has left his own mark which prevents
the overall design from looking purely mechanical. The
reason why craftwork is sosatisfying may well be because
it represents a deep urge in us

to reach higher and higher
levels of perfection. What does
the word ëperfectioní mean?
Before we enter the world of
different craft forms discussed
in this book, let us think about
the meaning we can give to the
word ëperfectioní in the context
of crafts. There are two ways in
which we can proceed in this
search. One is to reflect on the
experience that working on a
craft brings to us. The other
way is to examine the outcome
of our work, and look for aspects
of perfection in the 
product.
4LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe Experience of Craft Work
It is easy to say that the work involved in any craft ismainly of a manual kind, in the sense that craft work is
done with the help of physical effort on our part. When we

make a small diya of clay or a garland of flowersó
malaóour eyes and hands are actively engaged. However, if we
look at this kind of work more deeply, we will notice that it
is not purely manual. A great deal of mental attention is
required at every stage, and at certain points we must
concentrate on what we are doing, otherwise the mala we
are making may not turn out well. Each flower has to be
accommodated in the mala with care and concern for its
individual character, size and colour. It must have space,

good company, and the needle must pierce it without injury.
If we have made a diya many times we may get so good at it
that we donít need to think about it all the time. In other
words, we get so ëskilledí at this work that our hands and

eyes carry on without conscious decisions being made by
the mind.You must have noticed how a tailor can continue to
work on his machine while talking. A barber can do the
same thing. But even a highly skilled tailor or barber

does pay attention to what he is doing if he does not
want to make mistakes. Perhaps what happens is that
the mind and the body together enter into a rhythm of
work. Certain decisions which are of a routine kind get
taken without too much thought, hence the person can
keep talking while his hands are working; but at certain
moments when something crucial is to be done, the mindtakes full control and guides the eyes
and the hands to focus on the work
itself. This remarkable unity of body
and mind in craft work is what
makes it a pleasant and deeply
satisfying experience.If you have never attempted tolearn any kind of traditional craft till
now, you might have ignored the two
suggestions given earlier in this
chapter, i.e., to make a book mark

and a mala. You still need a personal
taste of making something with your
hands in order to get the taste of
mindñbody experience. So, here is yet
another suggestion, for something
simpler than the earlier examples.
5LEARNING ABOUT CRAFTSTry something as simple as making a cover for your
textbook. As you start, alert your mind to all the decisions
you are going to take, starting with choosing a piece of
paper large and strong enough to survive for a few months
in your school bag. The kind of paper you choose will have
implications not only for the number of months the cover
will lastóits longevityóbut also for the neatness of the
folds, the sharpness of the corners, and, of course, for the
attraction that any design or picture might have, on the
side which will wrap the front cover of the book. If you
select a page from an old newspaper to cover your textbook,
its size may be convenient, but the neatness of the folds
will suffer because the paper used as newsprint is rather
thin and tears easily if you fold it along a sharp line. Brown
paper used for wrapping or making parcels may be more
suitable. Following this decision about the material to be
used, you will need to think about the length and width of
the piece, depending on how much paper you want to allow
inside the cover, when you fold it along the bookís own

cover. At the corners, you can choose a simple fold or a

somewhat complex fold. This kind of fold, which doubles
up the paper not only gives strength to the corners but
also looks more attractive when you open the book. Why
do corners need greater strength? As a user of textbooks
since childhood, you can easily answer this question.This example should suffice to indicate how manydecisions are involved in any manual work if it aspires to
achieve as much perfection as possible. You can now

appreciate the role that a long and sustained tradition in
any specific craft plays. If a craft has lived for a few hundred
years, many of the decisions required to practise it will
have been taken by several generations of people who lived
before us. These decisions have now become the basic
knowledge of that craft. We can acquire this knowledge by

sitting and working with a practitioner of that craft. Of
course, you will still need to apply your mind when doing
the craftwork yourself, but at least you will know what to
do. By learning the basic knowledge of a craft from someone
who knows it, you will become aware of the decisions you
will need to take when you start working and also of the
small mistakes you will make as you move towards
completion. The mistakes will not hurt you the way mistakes
in an examination of mathematics or language do. Rather,

the mistakes will look like your signature on the product.
In this sense, they will make the product a precious memory
of your first experience of trying the craft, and the processes
of thought and feeling.
Looking at a Craft ProductAs the opening lines of this chapter pointed out, craftworksare so much a part of our daily life that we take them for
granted and donít observe and appreciate them. Now that
you have opted to study Heritage Crafts as a subject, it
is important for you to look at examples of crafts carefully
and find in them the characteristics of a long and great
tradition. You can, for example, learn several important

aspects of weaving by observing a handmade carpet or
duree in your home or school. First of all, draw your
fingers lightly across the duree to feel the characteristic
texture that a woven cotton duree has. It is quite differentfrom the texture of a knotted rug. The word ëtextureí
literally refers to the feel that the arrangement of fabric
in a textile gives. Now, if you have noticed the texture,
observe the pattern in which the duree has been woven.
Notice the shapes created by the threads of different
colours. The combinations and shades of colours together
bring about a sense of design. Try to imagine how the

shape you see in its entirety must have emerged bit by
bit as the duree progressed from thread to thread. Do
you think the duree maker could ëseeí the completed design
in his or her mind long before it surfaced fully on the
duree? That is what must have happened, and it musthave required great patience to wait for the work to becompleted. Indeed, the joy of
waiting to complete a piece of
craft is what keeps one going,
slowly and carefully, taking
small steps at oneís own
relaxed pace in a quiet room
of oneís own home. It is
certainly very different to
work in a textile factory,
surrounded by the noise of
superfast machines.
Do think about all the
differences between the two
modes of production, and the
two kinds of products before
you move to the next chapter.
6LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
An artisan drawing beforecarving on wood1CRAFTS HERITAGE
India is a combination of many worlds, living in many
centuries and cultures. The world of Indiaís craftspeople
spans millennia and spreads across the length and breadth
of our land, which is seen in cities and towns, by-lanes
and villages. A small crafted object made in an unknown
village of India has the capacity of becoming an object

displayed in the finest museums of the world, yet the same
object is often merely an object of utility for a particular
community which never thinks of it as a great art. It is
often a lack of knowledge of the variety of cultures,
techniques, meanings, uses and relevance of such
handcrafted objects that allows us to neglect their beauty
and take our cultural heritage for granted.The Definition of CraftsIndian words for handicrafts are commonly hastkala,hastshilp, dastkari, karigari, all meaning handiwork, butthey also refer to objects made with craftsmanship, i.e.,
specialised skills of the hands which are also artistic. The
aesthetic content is an intrinsic part of such objects and

means the object of utility has a value that goes beyond
mere usage and is also pleasing to the eye. A handcrafted
object is seldom merely decorative, and whether it has no
embellishment or is highly decorative,
its true purpose is served only when it
is both useful and has a fine form.Crafts and Culture
Crafts are therefore closely related toconcept of form, pattern, design, usage,and these lead to its total aesthetic
quality. When all these aspects arerooted in the culture of the people in a
particular area of a country or among
certain communities, crafts become a
8LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWall and floor decoration in
a house, JharkhandDetail of calligraphy in stone,Qutub Minar, New Delhi
part of its cultural heritage. Handcrafted objects are not
just valuable for their aesthetic quality, but as objectsproduced by traditional craftsmen and women forceremonial and religious purposes, and most importantly
as a means of livelihood.Cultural and Social Needs for CraftsThis creative spirit in the midst of the struggle for survival
is one of the unique and significant distinguishing featuresbetween men and beasts. Why else do the forestcommunities, even today, lay so much store by painting
the inside or outside of their homes, or adorning their bodieswith decorative tattoos or ornaments? Why are peopleaffected, and often spiritually guided, by colours? Why does
a woman fashion an attractive handle for the broom sheuses to clean her home and why does she spend timeinvoking the blessings of the gods through her painted
designs on her kitchen floor?Crafts through the AgesIndia has been greatly blessed by having a many-layered,
culturally diverse, rich heritage of craft skills influencedby historical events combining with local practices andreligious beliefs. These influences have come from multiple
sources. Changes and enrichment have taken place fromtrade movements such as those on the Silk Route, whichbrought demands and resources from the Middle East and
Central Asia to the Far East, up to China. The skill ofweaving carpets and superior forms of shawls was broughtto Kashmir by the pre-Moghul king, Zain-ul-Abedin. Persian
artisans enriched carpet-weaving and shawl-makingaccording to the needs of Indian courts. On the other hand,the static nature of the Hindu caste system has kept many
craft forms alive merely because the artisan had noopportunity to move away to other professions as socialboundaries were rigid and hierarchical. The courts of
various maharajas encouraged excellence in many courtlycrafts connected with the making of armoury or jewellery.Temples kept alive the finest metal work, stone carving,
mural painting and even textile weaving right across India,
and particularly in South India. Here the Kammalars whoclaimed descent from the five divine artisan sons of Lord
Visvakarma, followed the Shilpa Shastras, the technicaltomes on the practice of art in Sanskrit. The high priestsamong the artisans follow these rules even today when
creating large vessels out of metal alloys for temple use.The element of religiosity in the practice of craft work spans
9CRAFTS HERITAGEA Kutchi womanembroideringmany regions and communities since the practice of theirart is seen as a striving for the ideal through the dedicationof their skill to the gods. It is seen as manís process ofreaching the epitome of his own capability in the pursuit of
excellence, and doing this by dedicating it to a higher beingin the spirit of worship. The silken temple cloths in SouthIndia are woven to drape the stone images of the gods, and
the gharchola and patola of Gujarat are mandatorypurchases for a trousseau and are valued highly partlybecause the weavers belong to high-caste families. Even
old and torn pieces are used to cover religious objects inthe prayer room of a house.Tribal Crafts
Tribal communities comprise about eight per cent of the

population of India. Spread out in different parts of thecountry, they have continued with ancient cultural
practices related to their specific ways of life. In Jammuand Kashmir, the Gujjars and Bakarwals are mountain
tribes who spend their lives crossing over from one side of
the mountains to the other in search of grass for theirsheep and goats. Their jewellery, blankets, embroideredcaps and tunics, saddle bags and sundry animal accessories
are similar to the artifacts of the people of Afghanistan,Iran, Iraq and the smaller countries of Central Asia. Therobust manner of the people and the heavily ornamented
women folk reflect as far down in India as Saurashtra andthe desert regions of Kutch in Gujarat, and Rajasthan.Mirror work in embroidery stems from the use of mica from
the desert sands in the garments of those who liked heavyand shining ornamentation. People of nomadic tribes usuallywore all that they had on their person. They found that the
sun reflected in the mica, making this an accessory thatembellished their garment suitably without any cost. Each
group developed its own style of embroidery and it is this
that can still be clearly seen in the many communitiesthat inhabit the western region of India. Both, the identityof the tribe and the marital status of a woman, are embedded
in the style of the embroidery and the colour and cut of theupper bodice worn by its women. As communities move in
search of greener pastures for their sheep, cattle and camels
across desert sands, a mere glance is enough to identify
their tribe and profession.The various tribes inhabiting the north-east of India liveamong the rich bamboo forests where the finest quality of
skill in the weaving of bamboo, cane and other wild grasses
can be seen. This group links itself culturally to the people
10LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIABamboo basket, Vietnamof Myanmar, Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam and even Japan
and China, where mat-weaving and basketry are of thehighest quality. Handloom weaving too is a common skillof this region. Apart from weaving ceremonial shawls andlungis, headscarves and waist belts, small scarves forceremonial greetings are woven in almost every household.These cloths are revered for many reasons: they establishthe identity of the tribe or the status of the wearer, they
serve as ëwelcomeí scarves to greet a visitor, they honour
the achievements of a chieftain, and they pass on skills
from generation to generation through their womenfolk.Other tribes are found in Central and South India,spread across the States of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,Chhattisgarh, Orissa, and to some extent, in Kerala. Ineach region they have different cultural practices andurbanisation has affected the extent to which they continueto make or use handcrafted objects. In most cases, however,
their deep connection with the forest in which they liveand their spiritual association with all forms of naturehas enabled them to retain a distinct style of makingbamboo items such as bows and arrows, musicalinstruments and baskets. Their metal work incorporatesthe world of trees, animals and human beings as if they

were all forged from the same shapes and impulses ofnature. Earthen vessels and toys are painted with boldblack and white stripes. Winnows for grain take onwondrous hues with strips of bamboo dyed in brilliantyellows and magenta pinks. Palm leaf brooms are playfullyembellished with decorative handles, and baskets carryingthe trousseau of the bride to her new home are cappedwith plumed birds made of bright coloured strips of bamboo.The making of craft items is at once a daily practice, aritual, and a celebration of creativity in everyday life.The textiles of the tribals of central India have theirown distinct identity. The tribes of central India spin andweave thick cream coloured yarn with madder red bordersand end pieces reflecting images from their lives. Birds,flowers, trees, deer or even an airplane decorate thesecloths. In Orissa, ceremonial cloths to be worn by the priestor priestess are required to be of a certain colour. Each
colour has an auspicious meaning and unity of communitiesis expressed through the similarity of dress and adornment.Tribal and indigenous arts related to specific cultural
traditions of various communities could be termed aspeopleís art as opposed to the more stylised classical artsthat evolved within the Hindu social system, or those that
11CRAFTS HERITAGETraditional potter (above)and weaver (below) at workwere the result of influences from different parts of the
world through trade or historical events. There was also agradual change in craft practices because of in
dustrialisation,and technological and cultural pressures from more dominanteconomic groups within and outside India.Formation of Social Groups
Those who worked with their hands in artisanal skills were
denied easy access to the tasks assigned to the upper castes.
While socially and psychologically detrimental, the caste
system locked artisanal skills in place and ensured the
transmission of this knowledge from generation to
generation in the absence of any alternative, thereby
preserving techniques and processes that may
otherwise have been lost. Even today, the
prajapati or 
kumhar (potter), the 
vankar or
bunkar (weaver), the 
ashari (carpenter) andall the other identified and categorised artisans
are divided and recognised by the caste
groupings whether they continue to practise
their skill or not.In The Arts of India by G.C.M. Birdwood, hecites the nineteenth chapter of the second
section (ëAyodhyakandaí) of the Ramayana, tolist the inhabitants of the city that are
represented in the procession with Bharata to
seek Rama. They are the trade guilds of
artisans: the jewellers, potters, ivory-workers,
perfumers, goldsmiths, weavers, carpenters,
braziers, painters, musical instrument
makers, armourers, curriers, blacksmiths,
coppersmiths, makers of figures, cutters of
crystals, glassmakers, inlayers and others. In
present-day India we can formulate broad
groupings of major practitioners of craft as
potters, weavers, metal-smiths, wood-carvers,
cane and bamboo weavers and stone carvers.
While these may be the larger skills, there are
many other crafts from 
shola pith work, 
papier-
m‡chÈ, innumerable styles of mural,miniature and floor painting, paper crafts,
glass work, and carpet and duree weaving. In
the area of textiles India undoubtedly has the
largest range of skills that can be found
anywhere in the world. While separating the
craft of making floor coverings out of rags and
yarn, we are left with textiles that consist of
12LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAWomen weaving baskets
with local moonj grass,
Bhadohi, Uttar Pradeshornamentation through pre-loom processes, plain weaving,
patterned weaving in which the ornamentation appears

during the weaving process, and post-loom ornamentation.
The last of these can be further subdivided into embroidery,
beadwork, block printing and tie-and dye techniques,
and zari (metallic thread) work, offering a further array of
skills that express themselves differently from one region
to another.
Empowerment of Women Artisans
In Bhadohi District of Uttar Pradesh hundreds of women
took up carpet weaving since young boys went to school

after the anti-child-labour campaign came into effect.
Sometimes four or five women weave a carpet together under

uncomfortable conditions, earning a meagre Rs 1500 per
carpet collectively. For women-headed households the
burden of bringing up children and staying alive under
such conditions can hardly be imagined. During a visit to
some carpet producing villages it was found that these
women, as a part of tradition and custom, weave baskets
with local moonj grass to serve as containers for sweets,
saris, jewellery, fruit and other items on ceremonial family
occasions. The brightly dyed grass of moonj is woven into
small and large baskets with intricate designs depending
on the creativity and mood of the maker. With some minor

suggestions regarding colour, size and costing, the women

were encouraged to bring a collection of these baskets from
every home and sell them at Dilli Haat in New Delhi. What
began as a shy and hesitant venture ended in delight as
the women sold out their stock earning Rs 17,000 in
the process. They described their experience as one of
independence, for they had control of the raw material (free
grass from the fields), control over production (home- and
leisure-based work), control over creativity (they design each
13CRAFTS HERITAGEBaskets, mats, coastersdesigned for everyday usebasket as they wish), and control over sales (they had sold
the items at the stall themselves). The earnings were free
of the male/malik control prevalent in the carpet industryand were entirely based on their own efforts. After some
design workshops were held in the villages and the produce
exhibited at different places, they were able to sell more
than six lakh rupees worth of baskets in one year. Perhaps

this is the closest example of what empowerment actually
means when translated from abstract jargon into reality.
But, there is still a lot of work to be done such as organisingthe women into self-help groups, encouraging savings and
delivering micro credit to them so that they have money
for raw material, transportation and other needs.There are many issues and areas of work involved inthis story: child labour, womenís work, the skill of basket

making, designing new baskets, finding new uses for these
baskets, calculating the cost of each basket so that they
fetch a fair return without making the basket too expensive,

planning a marketing strategy including an exhibition, a
catalogue, web marketing, learning about the benefits of a
self-help group and the availability of micro credit.
14LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAƒ Item  Quantity
PriceExported  to
  Textiles
1.Even though craftspeople produce objects of great utility
for every home, this community is often marginalised
in terms of what it earns and where it lives in the
village. Investigate and find reasons for this. Is this
situation changing?2.In several parts of India, women are prohibited from
using the wheel to make pottery. However, in Manipur,

women can also be potters. In your own area, identify
the tasks done by men and women at different stages
of making any craft object.3.ƒIn India, the crafts sector is the second largest exporter.
Collect data on crafts that are the most successful export
items and complete the following table.14EXERCISE.............................4.In your opinion, why is basket-making, mat-weaving
and making of brooms largely done by women?5.How do market forces influence the making of a craft
object? Think of a kite, a traditional paper toy, and a

papier
-m‡chÈ 
object. Consider: raw material, process,
form and shape, design and decoration, the ecologically
conscious buyer, the export market etc.
6.Which types of embroidery were traditionally done by
men in our country and why? Find out.7.In your opinion what are the factors that give a
distinctive character to crafts in a specific region?8.Looking at objects drawn from at least four different
regions of India, made from specific material such as
textile/clay, make a study of the variety found in
technique, design, colour and shape. Describe in detail.
