At the time of Dussehra, Kullu valley comes alive with thearrival of many mohras (metal plaques of Durga) fromdifferent parts of Himachal Pradesh. These gold and silver
masks were commissioned by the kings in ancient times.
Each village brings its mohra from its local temple to Kullu
in a decorated palki (palanquin). The 
mohras are then moved
into a huge wooden rath that is pulled by hundreds of
devotees. At the time of Dussehra you can see processions
of these raths as they weave down the mountain. Musicians
accompany each of the processions and the whole Kullu
valley fills with the sound of their long metallic pipes.There are a variety of pipes, long telescopic ones knownas shanal or 
karnal and the ëSí-shaped curved trumpet
known as narasingha. These are made by local metal-smithswho are often attached to the temple.4METAL
Wind instruments,Himachal Pradesh
38LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe Role of the BlacksmithMetal craft is one of the most vital traditions of HimachalPradesh. Here blacksmiths, carpenters and stone workers
consider themselves a single group. While they maintain
their occupational distinctions, they frequently intermarry.
Carpenters and metalsmiths call themselves Dhimans and
trace their origins back to Vishwakarma.Blacksmiths are the largest craft group in Himachalvillages and, like all other artisans, they are largely employed
as farm labour. They are also traders who sell their products.

Like many crafts communities in India, their workshops
are in their homes. In Himachal the blacksmiths usually

work from their workshops located on the ground floor of
their homes.In any village in the world, the blacksmithís importancesprings from the fact that he is indispensable. The lohar(blacksmith) makes and mends the agricultural implements
that are made of iron and also fashions utensils with
material provided by the customers. In addition, he also
makes tools for other artisans, creates icons and
ornaments, and repairs damaged metal objects.  His

payment usually comes in the traditional way ó he receives

a share of the produce.Inside the Metal Workerís Studio
The wheelwright was also the blacksmith and the tinker of our
locality. He and his apprentices did all sorts of odd jobs ó
plumbing, carpentry, cabinet-making, forging pots and pans,
overhauling carriages and carts, repairing boats and barges and
a hundred other things. The things that he did not undertake
would make a shorter list than those he did.We could not imagine a wizardís cavern more
fascinating than our wheelwrightís workshop.
Its furnaces, big one and some smaller ones, were
a great attraction. What interested us most about
these furnaces was the intense glow the coal gave
when the bellows worked. It was also engrossing
to watch the red hot metal bars hammered into
shape. Cascades of sparks flew as from a fountain
of fire. It was like fireworks at the Diwali festival!
It took our breath away to see the bullocks shod
with iron hoofs and the cartwheels fitted with
iron bands and then dipped into water. How the

sizzling steam came out ó vapour coloured by
the light of the furnaces!ñ SUDHIN N.G
HOSE, And Gazelles LeapingInside a metalworkerís studio
39METALPatrons of Metal CraftThe patronage of the temple and royal court gave rise to
highly accomplished craftspersons, one generation followinganother practising the same skill for centuries.
As time went by, temple and rural art traditions camecloser together. Innumerable bronze figurines cast by rural
metalsmiths can be seen in village shrines and in homealtars even today. These images appear to be timeless.For our traditional rulers, the nobility and wealthylandowners, objects made of precious metal were symbolicmanifestations of power. Much of their income from taxes
was converted into treasure (khazana) in the form of objectsmade from precious metals and jewellery. It was inworkshops (karkhanas) that goldsmiths and silversmiths,whether private or public servants, practised their skillsunder the patronage and close supervision of their masters.Some of these objects were made to be presented as gifts
on special occasions such as the public assemblies (durbars)that formed part of court ritual, while others were onlybrought out for specific religious rituals. Still others weredesigned for everyday use.Less well off zamindars followed the example set by the
court. Even the rural population, with little money at itsdisposal, copied the customs of their superiors. Whatever
surplus earnings they had was invested by them in silverornaments worn by women daily. These proclaimed thewearerís social and economic 
status like the beautifullyattired women of Rajasthan.Mohras are fashioned out
of ashtadhatu, an alloy of
eight metals ó gold, silver,

brass, iron, tin, mercury,
copper and zinc.The Himachal StateHandicrafts Corporation
has established metal craft
training centres all over
the State to impart
training in bronze casting
and all metal craft
techniques.Gold Coins, Gupta PeriodDurbar of Bahadur Shah Zafar

40LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIADid you know that...For 11,000 years human beings have been fashioning metal for theiruse.Ore metals are the source of most metals. First the ores are minedor quarried from beneath the earth, or dredged from lakes and rivers,
then they are crushed and separated, and finally they are refined
and smelted to produce metal.By 5000 BCE copper was used to make beads and pins. By 3000BCE tin was added to copper to produce bronze, a harder metal.
Iron, even harder than bronze, was widely produced by 500 BCE.The technology of how to master metals (copper, bronze, iron)
developed independently in various parts of the world.By 3000 BCE, most of the gold extracting techniques used todaywere already known in Egypt.The concept of carats indicates the amount of gold in gold! Nowadayscopper and silver are often added to gold to make it harder. The gold

content in this is known as carats.More than half of the gold minedwith so much labour, returns to

the earthóburied in bank vaults!
41METALCrafting MetalsHuman cultures around the world have a long history ofexperimentation and expression using alloys like brass and
bronze, and precious metals like gold and silver, and in

more recent human history using iron and steel.We have created countless objects from different metals,
from tiny coins to buildings, pots and pans to timeless
images of gods and goddesses.Materials and ProcessesOther than silver, the metals used in our country for

craftwork are brass, copper and bell-metal. Brass is an
alloy of copper and zinc, bell-metal is a mixture of copper
and tin.The shaping of an object is done either by beating theingot or sheet metal to the approximate shape with a
hammer while it is hot, or by pouring the molten metal in
a mould that is made of clay for ordinary ware and of wax
for more delicate objects. The beating process is preferred
particularly for bell-metal and copperware as it is supposed
to make the object more durable. Further, tempering is

done by heating the article till it is red-hot, and then dipping
it in cold water. If it turns black in this process, light

hammering rectifies it.Soldering is used to join
two parts of an article
when it is manufactured
in more than one piece.
Joining together is done by
using a metal alloy which
the artisan prepares.Commonly usedtraditional metal vessels
42LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe lost wax process is a specific technique used for makingobjects of metal. In our country it is found in Himachal
Pradesh, Orissa, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal.

In each region, a slightly different technique is used.1.The lost wax process involves several different steps. First
a wax model of the image is made by hand. This is made
of pure beeswax that has first been melted over an open

fire, and then strained through a fine cloth into a basin
of cold water. Here it resolidifies immediately. It is then

pressed through a pichki or 
pharni ó which squeezes
the wax into noodle-like shape. These wax wires are then
wound around to the shape of the entire image.2.The image is now covered with a thick coating of paste,
made of equal parts of clay, sand and cow-dung. Into an
opening on one side, a clay pot is fixed. In this the molten
metal is poured. The weight of the metal to be used is

ten times that of wax. (The wax is weighed before starting
the entire process.) This metal is largely scrap metal
from broken pots and pans.42LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAThe Lost Wax Process
3.While the molten metal is poured in the clay pot, the
clay-plastered model is exposed to firing. As the wax
inside melts, the metal flows down the channel and takes
on the shape of the wax image. The firing process is
carried out almost like a religious ritual and all the steps
take place in dead silence. The image is later chiselled
with files to smoothen it and give it a finish. Casting a
bronze image is a painstaking task and demands a high
degree of skill.
43METALSometimes an alloy of five metals ó gold, silver,
copper, 
brass and lead ó is used to cast bronze images.The oldest bronze images in our country date back to
Mohen-jo-daro (2500 BCE). Today metalsmiths make

images with a mixture of brass, copper and lead due to
a scarcity of raw materials and the tremendous cost of
precious metals.43METAL
44LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAGovind Jhara, a metalsmithfrom Raigadh, sitting  before

his primitive kiln, starts his

metal casting with a little
prayer:Ao Dai (Come, Devi, sit
with me)
Andhe ko chaku dani (To
the blind give the seeing eye)Chola Bronze, Tamil NaduMaking of a Bronze ImageIn ritual items made of bronze the best is statuary which
represents the visible forms of the deity to be worshipped.

For this the Shilpa Shastraís elaborate treatise is faithfully
followed. From the Rig Vedic times there have been references

to two casting processes, solid and hollow, ter
med ëghanaíand ësushiraí. While the images are countless, each is very
individualistic, and the craftsman has to learn not only the

physical measurements of the right proportions to make the
images but also familiarise himself with the verses describing
each deity, its characteristics, symbolism and above all the
aesthetics. These verses are known as ëdhyanaí, which meansmeditation. This is to convey the need for intense concentration
on these instructions.While the tradition is there to preserve thecore of our heritage, obviously the craftsmanis expected to do much more than merely putthe limbs together; he has to endow them withthe character each image has to convey fromout of his own emotions, thoughts andvolitions.To give guidance in modelling each of theimportant parts of the body, it is likened tosome object from nature: eye-brows modelledafter the neem leaf or a fish; nose, the sesameflower; the upper lip, a bow; chin, a mangostone; neck, the conch shell; thigh, the bananatree-trunk; knee-cap, a crab; ear; the lily, andso on.Icon-making is still a laborious and time-consuming job which requires a lot ofconcentration and demands a formidable
array of tools, extreme skill and precision.Usually a coconut palm-leaf is used formarking out the relative measurements forthe icon with marks made by folding the leaf.When the mould is broken, care is taken tosee that the head of the icon is removed firstas a good omen.Tamil Nadu is one of the famous bronze-casting regions. Stylistically, the imagesbelong to different periods like Pallava,Chola, Pandyan and Nayaka and the imagesthat are now produced belong to one or theother of these styles. The icon- makers are
known as stapatis.ñ KAMALADEVI CHATTOPADHYAY
,The Glory of Indian Handicrafts
45METALSilverAccording to Hindu tradition, if objects made of gold and
silver become ritually polluted, they can be restored to
purity by the simple act of washing them in water or
scouring them with ash or sand. It was believed, for
example, that water is automatically purified when placed
in a gold or silver container. In the case of silver, this

theory has been scientifically validated and we now know
that the ionic reaction of silver with water does have the
effect of killing its bacterial content.Even though silver occurs rarely in its pure and naturalstate in India, it has always been widely available. Then

where did it come from? The answeróthrough 2000 years
of trade. While we exported spices, dyes, textiles, diamonds
and other luxury goods in both raw and finished forms to
the Mediterranean, East Africa, the Arabian seaboard, the
Red-Sea and the Persian Gulf, the islands of the Indonesian
archipelago and even China and Japan, our main import
has always been precious metals.Contemporary studies show that through centuries ofaccumulation followed by recent import (through both legal
and illegal channels!) the people and temples of India
possess more than four billion (4,000,000,000) ounces of

refined silver! This staggering figure is only a conservative
estimate.As silver has always been 15ñ23 times cheaper thangold, it lies within the reach of a much broader section ofour society.Utility items in metalfrom different parts of India,eighteenthñnineteenth centuries
46LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAMetal Craft Across IndiaTeamwork is essential in the craft ofmetal-work. In Lucknow, Uttar Pradeshfor example, the production of an
enamelled hookah base would involve
several different specialised skills, each
practised by a different craftsman. A
sunar makes the object; a 
chitrakar ornakashiwalla  marks out the surface
design; a chatera chisels away the
depression in the design needed to hold
the enamel; a minakar carries out the
actual enamelling; a jilasaz polishes the
object; a mulamasaz might gild it, while
a kundanaz sets the stones required in
the design. Successful teamwork of this
sort clearly relies on a strong underlying
design concept and a high degree of
stylistic coherence, as well as a feeling
of technical harmony amongst those
responsible for each stage of the process.In the Kinnaur District ofHimachal Pradesh, the metalobjects used for religious purposesare a unique synthesis of Hindu andBuddhist designs. The thunderbolt orvajra motif is commonly seen on kettles and jars.
Fruit bowls with a silver or brass stand designed
like a lotus, prayer wheels inscribed with the
ëom mani padme humí mantra, conch trumpets,miniature shrines and flasks are also made.
Many of these forms come from ritual objects
used in Tibetan Buddhist temples which are

located next to Hindu temples all over Kinnaur.
Koftgari is the term for a type of silverand gold damascene work produced in
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, Jaipur,
Rajasthan, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradeshand Punjab. In ordinary damascene (tar-
i-nishan), a technique used frequentlyto adorn the blades of swords, a chiselled
groove is first made into which precious
metal wire is hammered. The koftgariprocess is simpler and less time
consuming, and allows for much freer
decoration. The entire surface of the
object is first chiselled in at least two
different directions so as to roughen it
and then the wire (either silver or gold
or both) is hammered onto it in intricate
patterns. ëTrueí damasceners looked

down on this method, but it is simply an
alternative process. Once the
manufacture of arms and armour had
ceased, craftsmen began to apply this
decorative technique to trays, boxes and
other objects.
47METALBidri, a technique named after its place of origin, Bidar,
Andhra Pradesh, is the application of inlay (mainly silver)to objects cast in a relatively soft alloy of zinc, copper and
lead. After the inlay work is completed, the ground is
stained black using chemicals, thus creating a splendid
contrast to the silver decoration.In Kerala to make the 
uruli (wide-mouthed cookingvessel, with flat or curved rims) the lost wax process is
used. A giant cauldron called varpu, which ismagnificent in form, is used in temples for making
prasad to feed thousands of devotees. Kerala also has
a great tradition in making metal tumblers for drinking,
which range in size and are very elegantly shaped.Nachiarkoil in Thanjavar District of 
Tamil Nadu is an important
bell-metal centre. This is due to the presence of light brown sand
called vandal on the banks of the Cauvery, ideally suited for makingmoulds. Some of the articles made by casting are vases in different
shapes, tumblers, water-containers, plain and decorated

ornamental spittoons which are a speciality of this place, food-
cases, bells, candle-stands, kerosene lamps, picnic carriers, and
a large variety of oil lamps.No other country has such imagery and symbolismbuilt around lamps as India. As a symbol of Agni,
the fire-god, lamps are auspicious and used at
marriages, and also to welcome important guests.
Lamps are found in many different forms often
with a handle attached to a small tray, shaped as
a cobra, fish or swan. These vary in size from
little ones for quiet personal worship, to large
pedestal ones to light a spacious hall.Among the numerous
ritualistic articles made
of metal in Gujarat are
large temple-bells. The
famous temple-bell on
the Girnar Hill weighs
240 kg.  Another popular

item is the typical low
square stool and low arm
chairs. This pure metal
furniture was highly
ornamented in a variety
of styles and was used
by royalty.
48LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.The metal workerís craft is indispensable in India. List
their contributions in different sectors like agriculture,

construction, transportation etc.2.Refer to a national newspaper and record the prevailing
rates of gold and silver. Plot a graph showing the price

fluctuation of these metals over a fortnight/month. What
factors do you think contribute to this fluctuation?3.Traditionally, metal objects were sold by weight and
the cost of workmanship was not taken into
consideration for deciding the price. In the West the

cost of workmanship is often greater than the value of
the material. In your opinion how should the price ofan object be determined? Give reasons to support your
argument.4.Looking at the map page of this chapter, create a table
listing reasons why various metal work techniques are
used in different parts of the country (see following
example). Define precisely each one of the processes.
In your own region find out which of these techniques
are used in working with metals.RegionTechniqueProcess Himach
al PradeshRepoussÈA 
thin metal sheet isplaced on a carved
wooden block and
hammered so that the
design appears clearly
on the metal sheet.48EXERCISE.............................5.Metalsmiths are indispensable in our lives. Find outtheir social status in your region. Are they called to
perform any special ceremonies?6.Sudhin Ghoshís passage explains the crucial role that
fire plays in metal crafts. What measures can you
suggest to reduce fire and smoke related hazards?7.In several religions, precious and semi-precious metal
objects are used. Find out what these are and who
makes them.
