Textiles are a part of Indiaís history ó its past, present,and future. Indian textiles were found in the tombs of the
Egyptian Pharaohs, they were a sought-after export to
ancient Greece and Rome, they also became part of the
fashionable attire of both European and Mughal courts.
Suppressing and replacing the Indian handloom cotton
trade with mill-made alternatives was a key factor of the
British Industrial Revolution. That is the reason Gandhi
made handspun khadi a symbol of the Indian Independence
movement. Even today, millions of craftspeople all over
India produce extraordinary traditional textiles that appeal
to the international market.Weaving a Tradition
Sathya sat at the big
wooden loom, throwing the
shuttle through the shining

silk threads stretched on its
frame. As he wove the warp
and weft together, the fabric

that unfolded was a
Kanjeevaram silk saree,
purple and red, with gold
tigers, elephants and
peacocks dancing together
on its resplendent 
pallav.The ëthak-thakí sound of the
shuttle as it moved to and
fro had always been part of
his life. His father, and his

fatherís father, and his

fatherís fatherís father, had

all woven sarees on the
same family loomóas had
their forefathers as far back
as memory could stretch.TEXTILES8Brocade work, Varanasi

84LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIASathya was 17. He had learnt to weave when he was eight,
though he longed to play football with the other village boys.
New laws do not allow children below fourteen years of age to
work. But everyone in his village was involved in weaving.
The women spun the thread, and stretched the warp on the
loom. The village dyers and washermen dyed the yarn in

wonderful colours, starched, and sized the finished fabric.
Traders came to the village from all over India to buy the

sarees, while other traders from Surat brought the gold zarithread with which they were woven. The village economy
depended on women continuing to wear these traditional
sarees for weddings, festivals, and special occasions. Sathyaís
father had a picture cut-out from a magazine of a famous film
star in one of his sarees.Sathyaís grandfather was now too frail and blind to weavethe intricate sarees. He told Sathya stories of the days, many
hundred years ago, when South Indian weavers were one of
the richest communities in India. Their wealth built the huge
temples and funded royal armies.
Whole communities were known for their weaving skills, andtheir surnames pr
oudly denoted their trade ó V
ankars in
Gujarat, Ansaris in UP, 
Mehers in Orissa ó just as the KutchiKhatris were dyers and printers.Sathya knows that these days even highly skilled weaversare desperately poor, even though their sarees are worn only

by the very rich.  Weavers depend on traders for loans in order

to pay for the expensive silk and gold yarn from which the

sarees are woven. Machine-made sarees made in the big
industrial mills and cheap synthetic silk copies from China are
taking over the market.Kanjeevaram saree,
Tamil Nadu
85TEXTILESIndian hand-crafted textiles are unique today for theirvariety and beauty. This is a living craft, practised by millions
of craftspeople ó many in their teens and twenties. No other
country in the world has a weaving tradition that goes back
thousands of years and is still part of the mainstream economy.
Sathya and other young craftspeople like him make India
special and proud.Yarn, Threads and Fibres
In the story about Sathya you read about many aspects of
weaving. You came across terms 
like ëyarní, ëloomí andëshuttleí, ëwarpí and ëweftí, ëstarchingí and ësizingí, ëtradersí
and ëweaversí. Some of the fibres commonly used in textile
weaving are:cottonsilkwool
mixture of the above
gold and silver thread, etc.
Cotton: It has been cultivated in India since the Harappan
Civilisation. Raw cotton is a round fluffy white ball growing
on a bush about three feet high. Earth, seeds and other
impurities are removed from the cotton balls by ginning.
The loose fibres of cotton are collected and bowed with a
bow made of canes and the string of the mid-rib of a banana
leaf. The vibration of the string fluffs and loosens the cotton.
It is spun on a charkha 
or spinning wheel to the requiredthickness and texture and is then ready for weaving.Warli representation of
gathering and spinningcotton, MaharashtraA variety of cotton fabrics were woven all over the country,
ranging from course, strong gauzes to the finest of muslins,
that represent the highest achievement of the cotton-
weaving industry in India.Indian muslins were used as shrouds for royal Egyptian
mummies, and used as garments to adorn Mughal
emperors 3000 years later. Delicate muslin cottons were

given poetic 
names like ë
flowing 
waterí (abrawan), ëeveningdewí (shabnam), and ëwoven airí (bafthava), by their courtpoets. Now they are commissioned by national and
international designers!
Cotton Shawl, Gujarat
86LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIASecret of SilkSome textile traditions came to us from other parts of the worldójustas silk came to India from China. According to legend, the Chinese hadbanned the export of silk worms; however, they were smuggled into

India by Chinese Buddhist monks in the hollow shafts of their cane
walking sticks.The thread is classified by its thickness: the thinner thethread, the higher the number of counts, and the finer the
fabric. Its fineness and its absorption quality make it an

ideal fabric for the heat of the Indian summer.
Silk: It is made from the cocoon of a cream-coloured moth
which feeds on the leaves of the mulberry tree. The
caterpillar of the silk moth spins an oval cocoon of very
fine silk, the size of a pigeonís egg. The silk is generally
yellow, but sometimes white.About 1600 silk worms produce nearly 500 grams of silkand one hectare of land produces enough mulberry leaves
to feed caterpillars that can produce 46 kg of silk. It takes
about seven days for the cocoon to be fully spun round
with silk.The cocoons are collected and sorted into different qualities
and then boiled. The silk thread is reeled and twisted, dried
and polished. It is then wound on a spindle and spun. The
softness, the lustre and the tensile quality of silk make it
one of the most prized materials for weaving fabrics.Silk cocoonKanjeevaram saree,Tamil NaduMashru and Himru, GujaratIkat silk saree, OrissaMix of Silk and Cotton: Another glorious fabric is mashru,a lustrous weave from Gujarat, patterned in brilliant
multi-coloured stripes, or dots as fine as rice grains.
Though it appears like silk it is not really silk. Mashru,and himru, have a twisted weave with a silk underside toreplicate the look and feel of satin while technically
remaining cotton.Tussar, Eri and Moga:
 India is the only source of tussar
silk that comes from the Antheria Assamia moth, which
feeds on the leaves of the Som and Wali trees. Tussar silk

has a coarse, uneven texture and a slightly yellowish
brown colour. Since it is less strong in texture and cannot

be refined it does not have the same sheen or fineness as

mulberry silk.Women weavers of Assam make their traditional 
mekla-chador costumes with golden moga and eri silk, which
come from worms that feed on Ashoka and castor leaves
rather than mulberry leaves.
87TEXTILESWool: 
It is spun from the fleece of animals. Sheep wool is
the most common, but in India goat wool, camel hair, and

ibex hair is also used. In North India the angora rabbit is
bred for its fine, long, very soft 
and silky hair. 
Its warmth,
tensile strength and resistance to fire, give this wool its
special quality.The fame of the Kashmiri Jamawar shawl can be gaugedfrom the fact that the English word ëshawlí is derived from the
Persian ëshalíóa length of woven woollen fabric. Shawl weaving
in Kashmir was introduced by the ruler Zain-ul-Abidin in the

fifteenth century bringing in Turkistan weavers to teach
the twill tapestry technique to local weavers. As many as
fifty colours were used on one shawl.The rough goat wool dhablas worn by shepherds and
camel herders in Kutch and the Thar Desert have been
reinvented into wonderful contemporary shawls, home

furnishings and throws. Today designers are translating
indigenous motifs and colours from tribal shawls of the
North-east and Kinnauri shawls of Himachal into softer
merino and sheep wool.Jamawar shawl, KashmirThe celebrated Kashmiri shahtoosh ëring shawlí made from the fleece of
the wild Himalayan ibex is so fine that a metre of this woollen shawl
can pass through a manís signet ring. Production and sale is banned
today for ecological reasons and to prevent the extinction of the ibex.

Weaving it was a fine art, wearing it now a forbidden luxury.
Woollen shawls from
different states of India
88LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIATextile TechniquesIndian textiles may be divided into two groups: loomdecorated and post-loom decorated fabrics.Loom-decorated fabrics
 are provided with artistictreatment when on the loom.Post-loom decorated fabrics are textiles in which artistictreatment is given after it is woven. In other words, plain
textiles are decorated with techniques such as:dyeing; tie and dyehand printing; hand paintingembroiderypatchwork and appliquÈWorking at a loom
Tie and dye
Hand paintingLoom-decorated fabricAppliquÈEmbroidery
89TEXTILESLoom-decorated Fabrics: In differentstates of India handloom weaving is doneon a variety of looms such as:throw-shuttle loomfly-shuttle loomloin loompit loomjacquardThe art of weaving is governed by threemovements ó shedding, picking and
beating.The shedding movement consists ofmoving the treadle with the feet, to make
the alternate warp threads open for the
shuttle.The picking movement propels theshuttle to run across to the other side.The beating movement consists ofpatting the weft thread into place.As the process is repeated, the weftthread passes from side to side, over one
set of warp threads and under the other.

These movements are repeated to produce
the basic fabric. Textures are produced
by varying the count of the warp threads,
and by weaving them tightly or loosely.
Patterns can be produced with the
introduction of coloured warp and weft threads.Women of the North-Eastern states weave bold black,
red and white cotton shawls with images of shields, swords,
butterflies and snakes, using a narrow loin loom which
they attach to their waists with straps.An 80-year-old Manipuri woman wearing a worn

handloom shawl was asked whether she was cold and
why she did not buy a warm synthetic mill-made sweater
that was inexpensive and easily available in the market.Her reply reminds us of so many intangible thingswe disregard: ìIíve spun this with my own hands; my
mother and sisters have woven it. The warmth of so
many fingers has gone into this. How can a machine
make anything warmer?îLoom decoration of fabrics
90LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIABlock PrintingBlock-printing is a
post-loom 
method ofdecorating fabric.Making a blockWooden blocks
Block printing, as it is practised all over Western and Central

India, is described below.Each design is printed with a series of differentintricately cut wooden blocks.1.Carving the blocks is itself an artó
duta, the block for
the outline, gud, for the background, one block for eachof the other colours. Some designs have as many as six
to eight different colours.2.The block is dipped in liquid colour, and pressed firmly
onto the specially treated cloth with a little bang of the
other hand to make it register evenly.3.Once the whole cloth has been printed with one block,
printing with the next block follows, and then the next,
in sequence.4.Printers have to be careful to place the little marker at
the corner of the block to make sure it doesnít slip and
that each colour fits into the design accurately.

91TEXTILESDistinctive Designs and TechniquesLike weaves and embroideries, block-print designs andcolours have the special stamp of the places from where
they originate.Those from Sanganer in Rajasthan have designs thatinclude delicate floral butis in a range of colours.Farrukhabad of Uttar Pradesh has all-over paisley jaals.Bagh prints from Madhya Pradesh are in dramatic red
and black.Dhamadka of Kutch is famous for its double-sided 
ajrak,interlocked hexagonal motifs in shades of indigo, crimson
and black, which requires 15 different processes to achieve.There are also numerous block-printing techniques ódirect, resist, batik, discharge, khari chhaap (gold and
silver stamping).In some, the dye is applied directly to the cloth, in others,areas are prevented from getting coloured by the use of
wax, mud, or chemicals. Each technique is distinctive.Printed motifsTop left: Bagh,Madhya PradeshBottom left: Dhamadka,Kutch, GujaratTop right: Farrukhabad,Uttar PradeshBottom right: Sanganer,
RajasthanWooden block of
paisley motif91TEXTILES
92LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIAIndian EmbroideryThere are shawls from 
Kashmir that are
magically two-sided with the same design

embroidered in different colours on each
side. This is known as do-rukha. A single
shawl may take over two years to complete.In Kutch in Western
India, the women,
whether Rabari, Ahir,

Mochi, Meghwal,
Darbar or Jat, 
learn toembroider from a
young age. They
embroider their
trousseausóskirts,
cholis, veils, quilts,decorative pieces for
their homes. Most
Kutchi embroideries
use wonderful colours ó magenta, emerald
green, yellow, and purple. As bright as their
desert landscape is bleak, their embroideries
are exuberant, with designs of flowers,
peacocks, elephants and parrots. Each village
and community in Kutch has its own
distinctive set of stitches and motifs: cross-
stitch, satin and herringbone stitch, and a
very fine chain stitch done with a hook. Shiny
mirrors are stitched onto the fabric.Punjab is famed for its traditional
embroidery called phulkarióflowering work. Using threads in
brilliant colours like flaming pinks,
oranges, mustard yellows and
creams, the reverse satin stitch is
done on a brick-red khadi cloth. An all-
over embroidered 
shawl  (
dupatta) iscalled a bagh, literally resembling agarden of flowers.Sujni, from
 Bihar, is a form of
quilted embroidery with mainly
narrative themes.The explorer, Marco Polo, said in the

thirteenth century about India: 
ì...embroideryis here produced with more delicacy than
anywhere in the worldî.
93TEXTILESThere are 22 different chikan stitches. Legend has it that Empress
Noorjehan invented chikan while making a cap for her husband,
Jehangir. 
Chikan-work from
 Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh, 
has manydifferent stitches worked on cotton mull, creating a textured
relief of flowers, paisleys and stars. The stitches have wonderful
namesóghas-ki-patti as delicate as grass, murri which looks justlike a grain of rice, and keel, the tip of a nail. The most common
are: bakhia, a herringbone stitch done on the reverse of the
material so that the design appears like a shadow, tepchi, alinked running stitch, and phanda, a tight round knot, used to
form flowers and leaves.Kantha, embroidery from
Bengal, is made ofthousands of fine stitches,
giving the fabric a puckered
quilted look. In Bangladesh
and India kantha was used
to make quilts and coverlets.
Old sarees were folded
together and embroidered
with coloured threads
pulled from saree borders.
Now kantha embroiderers
make sarees and 
dupattasfor the metro market.Patchwork and appliquÈ are other
textile skills practised by women all
over India. They range from the tiny
geometric patchwork gota done in
Rampur and Lucknow, to the bold,
vividly patterned pictorial quilts of
Rajasthan and Gujaratóeach
bride was expected to have at least
a dozen.Pipli in Orissa has its own
unique form of appliquÈóbold red,
yellow and green dancing elephants
and parrots, outlined with white or
black chain-stitch on equally
colourful base fabric. It was
developed initially to make the rathprocession hangings for the Puri
Temple, but is now used for garden
umbrellas, cushions and for other
urban needs.93TEXTILESThe Lambani, Lambada and Banjara gypsy tribes from Andhra Pradeshand Karnataka in South India create spectacular embroidery. Likethe Kutchhis, they too wear wonderful skirts, backless blouses and
veils, covered with vibrant, colourful mirrored designs, silver or metal
coins and ornaments at the edges. Their designs are geometric rather
than naturalistic flowers, birds and animals.Kasuti of North Karnataka is a combination of four different
stitches, done on the borders, pallav and blouse of the blue-black,
indigo-dyed Chandrakala saree, an essential part of the trousseau of
Hindu brides of the region. The motifs are pictorial in character: the
Tulsi plant, temple chariots, eight-pointed stars, parrots, peacocks,
bridal palanquins, cradles, and flowering trees.
94LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIADid you know...Colour is the first thing one notices about India. AsKamladevi Chattopadhyaya has said, every colour has
its tradition, emotion, social context and rich
significance.Red, the colour of marriage and love; orange andsaffron, the colour of the ochre earth and the yogi who
renounces that earth; yellow, the colour of spring,
young mango blossoms, of swarms of bees, and of

mating birds. Blue, the colour of indigo, also the colour
of Krishna, the cowherd child-godÖ. Even the great gods
had their colours ó Brahma was red, Shiva was white

and Vishnu was blue.The Vishnudharmottara 
 speaks of  five white tones ó
ivory, jasmine, the August moon, August clouds after
rain, and mother-of-pearl.
It is not surprising that by the seventeenth century,William Moorcroft could list over 300 colour shades in
use among the shawl makers of Kashmir.
As early as the first century BCE travellers along theSilk Route recorded fabrics in seven shades of brown,
four shades of blue, and four shades of green.In India colours were made of vegetable and mineralmaterials: pomegranate, lac and madder for the pinks,
reds and browns; black from iron castings; myrobalam
petals for yellow. Colour was produced from most

unlikely sources: onion skins produced a beautiful
reddish brown; pistachio shells, green; glowing lacquer
red came from a humble beetle. The concentrated urine
of cows fed on mango leaves gave a rich orange yellow.There is a  story of a British Raj billiard table baize
(cloth used for billiard tables) which was stolen from
the Regimental Mess to extract just that exact green

required in a Jamawar shawl.As always, colours, even those derived from mineralsources (silicates and borates of different metallic
saltsó cobalt oxide, potassium chromate and
manganese carbonate) were given poetice names: Ab-e-leher (ripples of water), 
tote-ka-par  (parrotís wing),
khoon-e-kabutar (pigeonís blood).
94LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA
95TEXTILESHome and the MarketIn India, commercial embroidery made for themarket was always done by men. Even chikan work
was traditionally a male preserve, with women only
doing the coarser filling details. The intricate gold
wire and sequin work of Uttar Pradesh (zardozi,
kamdani and mukesh)
 done on a stretched wooden
frame, and Kashmiri ari, wool crewel
 work, 
tillaand sozni embroidery are still almost exclusively
a male domain.The lives of my family hang
on the thread I embroider
.ñ RAMBA BEN, embroiderycraftswoman fromBanaskanthaSozni with its intricate
detailing of flora and fauna
derives its inspiration from the
verdant, flowering beauty of the
Kashmir valley.Tilla 
work is now a majorbusiness for wedding costumes,
movie costumes and the fashion
ramp, and it reflects the glory
of the Mughal court that brought
gold wire work from the Middle
East and Byzantium.Today, rural womenembroiderers are finding new
empowerment and earning an
income from their embroidery
skills in the market. All
over India, be it Bihar or

Banaskantha, women now
embroider for a living.
96LIVING CRAFT TRADITIONS OF INDIA1.Read the verse by Kabir on page 23 and develop your
own poem using images from textile weaving.2.Look at traditional textiles in your home and develop a
table like the following example.96EXERCISE.............................3.From the farmer who grows the cotton, to the
advertising agency that sells the finished  product, the

textile industry employs thousands of people with
specialised skills. Create a profile of each.4.ìThe bones of the Indian weaver are bleaching the plains
of India,î said William Bentick in 1835. From your
understanding of history, describe the impact of
colonialism on the Indian textile industry.5.Consider Gandhiji and 
khadi and explore reasons why
and how the meaning and significance of khadi has
changed over the last 100 years.6.Consider the clothes worn by members of your extended
family. Why do they choose to wear what they wear?
Think of caste, religion, age, gender, traditions, and

fashion as expressed in the materials, headgear,

footwear, costs etc.
7.How is your own philosophy of life reflected in the clothes
that you choose to wear?8.Which types of embroidery were traditionally done by
men in our country, and why?9.Research and document the textile traditions of your
state.OriginTextileMotif
MeaningTamil NaduSilkFlower
Life, beauty,auspiciousness
