123iiiThe Three OrdersChanging Cultural Traditions
  Confrontation of Cultures      CHANGING TRADITIONS

124THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYChanging Traditions
WE have seen how, by the ninth century, large parts
of Asia and America witnessed the growth andexpansion of great empires Œ some nomadic, some based onwell-developed cities and trading networks that centred on them. Thedifference between the Macedonian, Roman and Arab empires and

the ones that preceded them (the Egyptian, Assyrian, Chinese,
Mauryan) was that they covered greater areas of territory, and were
continental or trans-continental in nature. The Mongol empire wassimilar.
Different cultural encounters were crucial to what took place. The
arrival of empires was almost always sudden, but they were almost
always the result of changes that had been taking place over a long
time in the core of what would become an empire.Traditions in world history could change in different ways. In western
Europe during the period from the ninth to the seventeenth century,
much that we connect with modern times evolved slowly Œ the

development of scientific knowledge based on experiment rather than
religious belief, serious thought about the organisation of government,

with attention to the creation of civil services, parliaments and different

codes of law, improvements in technology that was used in industry
and agriculture. The consequences of these changes could be felt with
great force outside Europe.As we have seen, by the fifth century CE, the Roman Empire in thewest had disintegrated. In western and central Europe, the remains of
the Roman Empire were slowly adapted to the administrativerequirements and needs of tribes that had established kingdoms there.However, urban centres were smaller in western Europe than further

east.By the ninth century, the commercial and urban centres, Aix,London, Rome, Sienna Œ though small, could not be dismissed.  Fromthe ninth to the eleventh centuries, there were major developments in
the countryside in western Europe. The Church and royal government

developed a combination of Roman institutions with the customary
125rules of tribes.  The finest example was the empire of Charlemagne inwestern and central Europe at the beginning of the ninth century.

Even after its rapid collapse, urban centres and trading networkspersisted, albeit under heavy attack from Hungarians, Vikings andothers.What happened was called ‚feudalism™. Feudalism was marked byagricultural production around castles and ‚manor houses™, where
lords of the manor possessed land that was cultivated by peasants(serfs) who pledged them loyalty, goods and services. These lords in

turn pledged their loyalty to greater lords who were ‚vassals™ of kings.

The Catholic Church (centred on the papacy) supported this state of
affairs and itself possessed land. In a world where uncertainties of life,

poor sense of medicine and low life expectancy were common, the
Church showed people how to behave so that life after death at leastwould be tolerable. Monasteries were created where God-fearing peoplecould devote themselves to the service of God in the way Catholic
churchmen thought fit. Equally, churches were part of a network of
scholarship that ran from the Muslim states of Spain to Byzantium,
and they provided the petty kings of Europe with a sense of the opulence
of the eastern Mediterranean and beyond.
The influence of commerce and towns in the feudal order came toevolve and change encouraged by Mediterranean entrepreneurs in
Venice and Genoa (from the twelfth century). Their ships carried on a

growing trade with Muslim states and the remains of the Roman Empire
in the east. Attracted by the lure of wealth in these areas, and inspired
by the idea of freeing ‚holy places™ associated with Christ from Muslims,
European kings reinforced links across the Mediterranean during the‚crusades™.  Trade within Europe improved (centred on fairs and the

port cities of the Baltic Sea and the North Sea and stimulated by a
growing population).The Palace of thePopes, in Avignon, a
fourteenth-centurytown in south France.CHANGING TRADITIONS
126THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYOpportunities for commercial expansion coincided with changingattitudes concerning the value of life. Respect for human beings and
living things that marked much of Islamic art and literature, and theexample of Greek art and ideas that came to Europe from Byzantinetrade encouraged Europeans to take a new look at the world. And
from the fourteenth century (in what is called the ‚Renaissance™),
especially in north Italian towns, the wealthy became less concerned

with life after death and more with the wonders of life itself. Sculptors,painters and writers became interested in humanity and the discovery
of the world.By the end of the fifteenth century, this state of affairs encouraged
travel and discovery as never before. Voyages of discovery took place.

Spaniards and Portuguese, who had traded with northern Africa,

pushed further down the coast of western Africa, finally leading to
journeys around the Cape of Good Hope to India Œ which had a great
reputation in Europe as a source of spices that were in great demand.
Columbus attempted to find a western route to India and in 1492

reached the islands which the Europeans called the West Indies. Other

explorers tried to find a northern route to India and China via the

Arctic.European travellers encountered a range of different peoples in the
course of their journeys. In part, they were interested in learning from

them. The papacy encouraged the work of the North African geographer
and traveller Hasan al-Wazzan (later known in Europe as Leo Africanus),

who wrote the first geography of Africa in the early sixteenth century
for Pope Leo X. Jesuit churchmen observed and wrote on Japan in the
sixteenth century. An Englishman Will Adams became a friend andThe Palace of theDoge, in Venice,

fifteenth century.
127counsellor of the Japanese Shogun, Tokugawa Ieyasu, in the earlyseventeenth century. As in the case of Hasan al-Wazzan, peoples that

the Europeans encountered in the Americas often took a great interestin them and sometimes worked for them. For example an Aztec womanŒ later known as Dona Marina Œ  befriended the Spanish conqueror of
Mexico, Cortes, and interpreted and negotiated for him.In their encounters, Europeans were sometimes cautious, self-effacing and observant, even as they frequently attempted to establish
trade monopolies and enforce their authority by force of arms as the

Portuguese attempted to do in the Indian Ocean after Vasco da Gama™s

arrival in Calicut (present-day Kozhikode) in 1498. In other cases,
they were overbearing, aggressive and cruel and adopted an attitude
of superiority to those they met, considering such people ignorant.
The Catholic Church encouraged both attitudes. The Church was thecentre for the study of other cultures and languages,  but encouragedattacks on people it saw as ‚un-Christian™.From the point of view of non-Europeans, the encounter with Europevaried. For much of the Islamic lands and India and China, though,
Europeans remained a curiosity until the end of the seventeenth
century. They were perceived as hardy traders and seamen who had
little to contribute to their sense of the larger world. The Japanese
learnt some of the advantages of European technology quickly Œ for

instance, they had begun large-scale production of muskets by the
late sixteenth century. In the Americas, enemies of the Aztec empire
sometimes used Europeans to challenge the power of the Aztecs. At
the same time the diseases the Europeans brought devastated the
populations, leading to the death of over 90 per cent of the people insome areas by the end of the sixteenth century.CHANGING TRADITIONS
128THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYThe period under consideration witnessed several majordevelopments in Europe, including changes in agriculture and thelives of peasants. It was also marked by a range of culturaldevelopments. This timeline draws attention to contects betweenthe continents, stimulated in many instances by the growth oftrade. The impact of these contacts was varied Œ while ideas,inventions and goods were shared across continents, there wasalso constant warfare between kingdoms to control land, resources
and access to trade routes. As a result men and women were oftendisplaced and enslaved, if not exterminated. In many ways, the
lives of people were transformed beyond recognition.
Timeline  iiI(C. 1300 TO 1700)
129DATES
1300-251325-13501350-751375-14001400-14251425-501450-751475-15001500-15251525-15501550-751575-16001600-251625-501650-751675-1700AFRICAPlague* in Egypt (1348-55)Ibn Batuta explores the SaharaPortuguese begin slave trading (1442)Songhai Empire in West Africaestablished based on trading networks
across the Sahara. Portuguese
expeditions and settlements along thewest coast of Africa (1471 onwards)Portuguese convert the king of Bokongoto ChristianityAfrican slaves taken to work on sugarplantations in America (1510)
Ottoman Turks conquer Egypt (1517)
Oyo kingdom of Nigeria at the height of itspower, centres for metal-working
*Portuguese destroy the Kongo kingdom(1662)EUROPEAlhambra and Granada emerge asimportant cultural centres in SpainThe Hundred Years™ War between England
and France (1337-1453)
The Black Death (a form of plague)spreads throughout Europe (1348)French peasants protest against hightaxes (1358)Peasant revolt in Britain (1381)Geoffrey Chaucer writes The CanterburyTales, one of the earliest compositions in
English (1388)The first printed book appears in Europe;Leonardo da Vinci ( 1452-1519), painter,
architect, inventor in ItalyEstablishment of the Tudor dynasty in
England (1485)Coffee from South America is drunk inEurope for the first time (1517)Štobacco,
chocolate, tomatoes and turkey are also
introduced. Martin Luther attempts to
reform the Catholic Church (1521)Copernicus propounds theory about solarsystem (1543)William Shakespeare (1564-1616),dramatist in EnglandZacharias Janssen invents the microscope(1590s)One of the first novels, Don Quixote,written in Spanish (1605)William Harvey demonstrates that blood ispumped through the body by the heart (1628)Louis XIV king of France ( 1638-1715)Peter the Great (1682-1725) attempts tomodernise RussiaTIMELINE-III
130THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYDATES
1300-251325-13501350-751375-1400
1400-14251425-501450-751475-15001500-15251525-15501550-751575-16001600-251625-501650-751675-1700ASIAThe Ming dynasty* in China (1368 onwards)Ottoman Turks capture Constantinople (1453)
Portuguese entry into China opposed,driven out to Macao (1522)The first Kabuki play staged in Japan (1586)Shah Abbas (1587-1629) of Persia introduces
European methods of military trainingTokugawa Shogunate established in Japan
(1603)All European traders with the exception of theDutch forbidden to trade with Japan (1637)
Manchu rule in China, (1644 onwards)
which lasts for nearly 300 years. Growing
demand in Europe for Chinese tea and silkSOUTH ASIAEstablishment of the Vijayanagara empire*(1336)Emergence of regional sultanatesVasco da Gama reaches India (1498)

Babur establishes Mughal control overNorth India, first battle of Panipat (1526)Akbar (1556-1605) consolidates Mughal ruleThe establishment of the British East IndiaCompany (1600)Construction of the Taj Mahal ( 1632-53)

131DATES
1300-251325-13501350-75
1375-1400
1400-1425
1425-501450-75
1475-1500
1500-15251525-15501550-75
1575-1600
1600-251625-501650-751675-1700AMERICASAztec capital at Tenochtitlan, Mexico
(1325), build temples, develop irrigationsystems and accounting system (quipu)*Incas establish control over Peru ( 1465)Columbus reaches the West Indies (1492)
Spanish conquest of Mexico (1521)French explorers reach Canada (1534)Spanish conquest of Peru (1572)England sets up its first colonies in NorthAmerica (1607). The first slaves are brought
from West Africa to Virginia (1619)The Dutch found New Amsterdam, nowcalled New York (1626). First printing

press is set up in Massachusetts (1635)The first sugar plantations areestablished in the West Indies (1654)The French colonise the Mississippi,naming it Louisiana after King Louis XIV
(1682)AUSTRALIA/PACIFIC ISLANDS
Magellan, a Spanish navigator, reaches the
Pacific Ocean (1519)Dutch sailors reach Australia by accidentSpanish sailors reach Tahiti (1606)
Dutch navigator Abel Tasman sails around
Australia without realising it. He then lands
on Van Diemen™s land, later called

Tasmania. He also reaches New Zealand,

but thinks it is part of a huge land mass!ACTIVITYYou may have noticed that column 6 (Australia/Pacific Islands) has very
few recorded dates. This is because the peoples in these areas oftenused other forms of recording, including paintings such as the one
shown above*. List at least one event/process from each of the preceding
5 columns which an Australian painter may have found worth recording.List another five which may have seemed irrelevant to her/him.TIMELINE-III
132THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYTHE THREE ORDERS
IN this chapter, we 
shall learn about the socio-economic
and political changes which occurred in western Europe
between the ninth and sixteenth centuries. After the fall ofthe Roman Empire, many groups of Germanic people from
eastern and central Europe occupied regions of Italy, Spain

and France.In the absence of any unifying political force, militaryconflict was frequent, and the need to gather resources toprotect one™s land became very important. Social
organisation was therefore centred on the control of land.
Its features were derived from both imperial Roman
traditions and German customs. Christianity, the official

religion of the Roman Empire from the fourth century,
survived the collapse of Rome, and gradually spread tocentral and northern Europe. The Church also became a
major landholder and political power in Europe.The ‚three orders™, the focus of this chapter, are three
social categories: Christian priests, landowning nobles and
peasants. The changing relationships between these three
groups was an important factor in shaping European
history for several centuries.Over the last 100  years, European historians have donedetailed work on the histories of regions, even of individual
villages. This was possible because, from the medieval period,there is a lot of material in the form of documents, details of
landownership, prices and legal cases: for example, churches
kept records of births, marriages and deaths, which have
made it possible to understand the structure of families and
of population. The inscriptions in churches give information
about traders™ associations, and songs and stories give a
sense of festivals and community activities.All these can be used by historians to understandeconomic and social life, and changes over a long period
(like increase in population) or over a short period (like
peasant revolts).Of the many scholars in France who have worked onfeudalism, one of the earliest was Bloch. Marc Bloch
(1886Œ1944) was one of a group of scholars who argued

that history consisted of much more than just political history,
international relations and the lives of great people. He

emphasised the importance of geography in shaping human6THEME
133history, and the need to understand the collective behaviouror attitudes of groups of people.Bloch™s Feudal Society is about European, particularlyFrench, society between 900 and 1300, describing inremarkable detail social relations and hierarchies, land
management and the popular culture of the period.His career was cut short tragically when he was shot bythe Nazis in the Second World War.
An Introduction to FeudalismThe term ‚feudalism™ has been used by historians to describe the
economic, legal, political and social relationships that existed in Europe
in the medieval era. Derived from the German word ‚feud™, which
The term ‚medievalera™ refers to theperiod in Europeanhistory betweenthe fifth and thefifteenth centuries. THE THREE ORDERSMAP 1: Western
Europe
134THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYmeans ‚a piece of land™, it refers to the kind of society that developedin medieval France, and later in England and in southern Italy.
In an economic sense, feudalism refers to a kind of agriculturalproduction which is based on the relationship between lords andpeasants. The latter cultivated their own land as well as that of the
lord. The peasants performed labour services for the lords, who in

exchange provided military protection. They also had extensive  judicial
control over peasants. Thus, feudalism went beyond the economic tocover the social and political aspects of life as well.Although its roots have been traced to practices that existed inthe Roman Empire and during the age of the French king
Charlemagne (742-814), feudalism as an established way of life in

large parts of Europe may be said to have emerged later, in the

eleventh century.France and EnglandGaul, a province of the Roman Empire, had two extensive coastlines,mountain ranges, long rivers, forests and large tracts of plains suited
to agriculture.The Franks, a Germanic tribe, gave their name to Gaul, making it
‚France™. From the sixth century, this region was a kingdom ruled byFrankish/French kings, who were Christian. The French had very
strong links with the Church, which were further strengthened when
in 800 the Pope gave King Charlemagne the title of ‚Holy RomanEmperor™, to ensure his support*.Across a narrow channel lay the island of EnglandŒScotland, whichin the eleventh century was conquered by a duke from the French
province of Normandy.
 Early History of France
481Clovis becomes king of the Franks.
486Clovis and the Franks begin the conquest of northern Gaul.
496Clovis and the Franks convert to Christianity.
714Charles Martel becomes mayor of the palace.
751Martel™s son Pepin deposes the Frankish ruler, becomes king
and establishes a dynasty. Wars of conquest double the size
of his kingdom.768Pepin succeeded by his son Charlemagne/Charles the
Great.800Pope Leo III crowns Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor.
840ONWARDS
 Raids by Vikings from Norway.
*The head of theEastern Church, inConstantinople, hada similarrelationship withthe Byzantineemperor.

135The Three OrdersFrench priests believed in the concept that people were members of oneof the three ‚orders™, depending on their work. A bishop stated, ‚Here
below, some pray, others fight, still others work...™ Thus, the three ordersof society were broadly the clergy, the nobility and the peasantry.In the twelfth century, Abbess Hildegard of Bingen wrote: ‚Who would
think of herding his entire cattle in one stable Œ cows, donkeys,sheep, goats, without difference? Therefore it is necessary to establish
difference among human beings, so that they do not destroy each
other – God makes distinctions among his flock, in heaven as on
earth. All are loved by him, yet there is no equality among them.™The Second Order: The NobilityPriests placed themselves in the first order, and nobles in the second.
The nobility had, in reality, a central role in social processes. This is
because they controlled land. This control was the outcome of a practicecalled ‚vassalage™.The kings of France were linked to the people by ‚vassalage™, similarto the practice among the Germanic peoples, of whom the Franks
were one. The big landowners Œ the nobles Œ were vassals of the king,
and peasants were vassals of the landowners. A nobleman acceptedthe king as his seigneur (senior) and they made a mutual promise: theseigneur/lord (‚lord™ was derived from a word meaning one who providedbread) would protect the vassal, who would be
loyal to him. This relationship involved elaborate
rituals and exchange of vows taken on the Bible
in a church. At this ceremony, the vassal receiveda written charter or a staff or even a clod of
earth as a symbol of the land that was being
given to him by his master.
The noble enjoyed a privileged status.He had absolute control over his property, in
perpetuity. He could raise troops called ‚feudal
levies™. The lord held his own courts of justice
and could even coin his own money.He was the lord of all the people settled onhis land. He owned vast tracts of land which
contained his own dwellings, his private fields
and pastures and the homes and fields of his
tenant-peasants. His house was called a manor.
His private lands were cultivated by peasants,
who were also expected to act as foot-soldiers in
battle when required, in addition to working on
their own farms.
‚Abbey™ is derivedfrom the Syriacabba, meaningfather. An abbey
was governed byan abbot or anabbess.French nobles startingfor a hunt; painting,
fifteenth century. THE THREE ORDERS
136THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYThe Manorial EstateA lord had his own manor-house. He also controlled villages Œ some
lords controlled hundreds of villages Œ where peasants lived. A small
manorial estate could contain a dozen families, while larger estatesmight include fifty or sixty. Almost everything needed for daily life wasfound on the estate: grain was grown in the fields, blacksmiths and
carpenters maintained the lord™s implements and repaired his weapons,
while stonemasons looked after his buildings. Women spun and wove

fabric, and children worked in the lord™s wine-presses. The estate hadextensive woodlands and forests where the lords hunted. They containedA manorial estate,England, thirteenth
century.
137pastures where his cattle and his horses grazed. There was a churchon the estate and a castle for defence.From the thirteenth century, some castles were made bigger foruse as a residence for a knight™s family. In fact, in England castleswere practically unknown before the Norman Conquest, and

developed as centres of political administration and military power
under the feudal system.The manor could not be completely self-sufficient because salt,
millstones and metalware had to be obtained from outside sources.Those lords who wanted a luxurious lifestyle and were keen to buy rich
furnishings, musical instruments and ornaments not locally produced,

had to get these from other places.The KnightsFrom the ninth century, there were frequent localised wars in Europe.The amateur peasant-soldiers were not sufficient, and good cavalry

was needed. This led to the growing importance of a new section ofpeople Œ the knights. They were linked to the lords, just as the latterwere linked to the king. The lord gave the knight a piece of land (called
‚fief™) and promised to protect it. The fief could be inherited. It extended
to anything between 1,000 and 2,000 acres or more, including a house
for the knight and his family, a church and other establishments tohouse his dependants, besides a watermill and a wine-press. As in the

feudal manor, the land of the fief was cultivated by peasants. In exchange,

the knight paid his lord a regular fee and promised to fight for him in
war. To keep up their skills, knights spent time each day fencing and

practising tactics with dummies. A knight might serve more than one
lord, but his foremost loyalty was to his own lord.In France, from the twelfth century, minstrels travelled from manorto manor, singing songs which told stories Œ partly historical, partly

invented Œ about brave kings and knights. In an age when not too
many people could read and manuscripts were few, these travelling
bards were very popular. Many manors had a narrow balcony above

the large hall where the people of the manor gathered for meals. This
was the minstrels™ gallery, from where singers entertained nobles while
they feasted.The First Order: The ClergyThe Catholic Church had its own laws, owned lands given to it byrulers, and could levy taxes. It was thus a very powerful institution

which did not depend on the king. At the head of the western Church
was the Pope. He lived in Rome. The Christians in Europe were guidedby bishops and clerics Œ who constituted the first ‚order™. Most villages
had their own church, where people assembled every Sunday to listen
to the sermon by the priest and to pray together.
‚If my dear lordis slain, his fateI™ll share,If he is hanged,then hang meby his side.If to the stake hegoes, with himI™ll burn;And if he™s
drowned, thenlet me drownwith him.™Œ Doon de Mayence,a thirteenth-centuryFrench poem(to  be sung)recounting theadventures ofknights.ACTIVITY 1Discuss socialhierarchiesbased ondifferent criteria:occupation,language,wealth,education.Comparemedieval FrancewithMesopotamiaand the RomanEmpire. THE THREE ORDERS
138THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYEveryone could not become a priest. Serfs were banned, as were
the physically challenged. Women could not become priests. Men
who became priests could not marry. Bishops were the religiousnobility. Like lords who owned vast landed estates, the bishops also
had the use of vast estates, and lived in grand palaces. The Church
was entitled to a tenth share of whatever the peasants produced
from their land over the course of the year, called a ‚tithe™.  Money
also came in the form of endowments made by the rich for their
own welfare and the welfare of their deceased relatives in the afterlife.Some of the important ceremonies conducted by the Churchcopied formal customs of the feudal elite. The act of kneeling while

praying, with hands clasped and head bowed, was an exact replica
of the way in which a knight conducted himself while taking vows ofloyalty to his lord. Similarly, the use of the term ‚lord™ for God was
another example of feudal culture that found its way into the
practices of the Church. Thus, the religious and the lay worlds of
feudalism shared many  customs and symbols.MonksApart from the Church, devout Christians had another kind oforganisation. Some deeply religious people chose to live isolated
lives, in contrast to clerics who lived amongst people in towns andvillages. They lived in religious communities called abbeys ormonasteries, often in places very far from human habitation. Two
of the more well-known monasteries were those established by St
Benedict in Italy in 529 and of Cluny in Burgundy in 910.Monks took vows to remain in the abbey for the rest of their livesand to spend their time in prayer, study and manual labour, like
farming. Unlike priesthood, this life was open to both men and

women Œ men became monks and women nuns. Except in a few
cases, all abbeys were single-sex communities, that is, there were
separate abbeys for men and women. Like priests, monks and nuns
did not marry.From small communities of 10 or 20 men/women, monasteriesgrew to communities often of several hundred, with large buildings
and landed estates, with attached schools or colleges and hospitals.
They contributed to the development of the arts. Abbess Hildegard
(see p.135) was a gifted musician, and did much to develop the

practice of community singing of prayers in church. From the
thirteenth century, some groups of monks Œ called friars Œ chose
not to be based in a monastery but to move from place to place,
preaching to the people and living on charity.ACTIVITY 2Discussexamples ofexpectedpatterns of
behaviourbetween peopleof different sociallevels, in amedieval manor,
a palace. and ina place ofworship.The word‚monastery™ isderived fromthe Greekword ‚monos™,meaning someonewho lives alone.
139In Benedictine monasteries,there was a manuscript with 73
chapters of rules which werefollowed by monks for manycenturies. Here are some of the
rules they had to follow:Chapter 6: Permission to speakshould rarely be granted tomonks.Chapter 7: Humility meansobedience.Chapter 33: No monk shouldown private property.
Chapter 47: Idleness is theenemy of the soul, so friars and
sisters should be occupied at
certain times in manual labour,

and at fixed hours in sacred
reading.Chapter 48: The monastery should be laid out in such a way that allnecessities be found within its bounds: water, mill, garden, workshops.
St Michael™s,Benedictine abbey in
Farnborough,
England.A Benedictine monk working on a manuscript, woodcut. THE THREE ORDERS
140THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYBy the fourteenth century, there was a growing uncertainty aboutthe value and purpose of monasticism. In England, Langland™s poem,Piers Plowman (c.1360-70), contrasted the ease and luxury of the livesof some monks with the ‚pure faith™ of ‚simple ploughmen and shepherdsand poor common labourers.™ Also in England, Chaucer wrote the
Canterbury Tales (see quotation below) which had comic portraits of anun, a monk and a friar.
The Church and SocietyThough Europeans became Christian, they still held on to some oftheir old beliefs in magic and folk traditions. Christmas and Easter
became important dates from the fourth century. Christ™s birth,celebrated on 25 December, replaced an old pre-Roman festival, the
date of which was calculated by the solar calendar. Easter marked

the crucifixion of Christ and his rising from the dead. But its date
was not a fixed one, because it replaced an older festival to celebrate
the coming of spring after a long winter, dated by the lunar calendar.
Traditionally, on that day, people of each village used to make a

tour of their village lands. With the coming of Christianity, they
continued to do this, but they called the village the ‚parish™ (the area
under the supervision of one priest). Overworked peasants welcomed
‚holy days™/holidays because they were not expected to work then.
These days were meant for prayer, but people usually spent a good
part of them having fun and feasting.Pilgrimage was an important part of a Christian™s life, and manypeople went on long journeys to shrines of martyrs or to big churches.
‚When in April the sweet showers fallAnd pierce the drought of March to the root
And the small birds are making melody
That sleep away the night with open eye–
(So Nature pricks them and their heart engages);
Then people long to go on pilgrimages,
And palmers* long to seek the foreign shrinesOf far-off saints, revered in various lands.
And especially from every shire
Of England, to Canterbury they make their journey.™
Œ Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1340Œ1400),
 The Canterbury Tales
. This was written inMiddle English, and the verse is a translation in modern English.*A monk who travelsto distant shrines.
141The Third Order: Peasants, Free and UnfreeLet us now turn to the vast majority of people, namely, those who
sustained the first two orders. Cultivators were of two kinds: free
peasants and serfs (from the verb ‚to serve™).
Free peasants held their farms as tenants
of the lord. The men had to render militaryservice (at least forty days every year).
Peasant families had to set aside certain days
of the week, usually three but often more,when they would go to the lord™s estate and
work there. The output from such labour,

called labour-rent, would go directly to the

lord. In addition, they could be required to
do other unpaid labour services, like digging
ditches, gathering firewood, building fencesand repairing roads and buildings. Besideshelping in the fields, women and children
had to do other tasks. They spun thread,
wove cloth, made candles and pressed
grapes to prepare wine for the lord™s use.
There was one direct tax called ‚taille™ that
kings sometimes imposed on peasants (the
clergy and nobles were exempted from
paying this).Serfs cultivated plots of land, but these
belonged to the lord. Much of the produce
from this had to be given to the lord. They
also had to work on the land whichbelonged exclusively to the lord. Theyreceived no wages and could not leave the
estate without the lord™s permission. The lord claimed a number of

monopolies at the expense of his serfs. Serfs could use only their lord™s

mill to grind their flour, his oven to bake their bread, and his wine-

presses to distil wine and beer. The lord could decide whom a serf

should marry, or might give his blessing to the serf™s choice, but on

payment of a fee.EnglandFeudalism developed in England from the eleventh century.The Angles and Saxons, from central Europe, had settled in England inthe sixth century. The country™s name, England, is a variant of ‚Angle-land™. In the eleventh century, William, the Duke of Normandy*, crossed
the English Channel with an army and defeated the Saxon king of England.

From this time, France and England were often at war because of disputes
over territory and trade.*The present Queenof England isdescended fromWilliam I.An Englishploughman, sixteenth-
century sketch. THE THREE ORDERS
142THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYWilliam I had the land mapped, and distributedit in sections to 180 Norman nobles who had
migrated with him. The lords became the chieftenants of the king, and were expected to give himmilitary help. They were obliged to supply a certain
number of knights to the king. They soon began to
gift some of their own lands to knights who would
serve them just as they in turn served the king.
They could not, however, use their knights for private

warfare, which was forbidden in England. Anglo-

Saxon peasants became tenants of various levels of
landholders.Factors Affecting Social and Economic RelationsWhile members of the first two orders saw the social system as stableand unchanging, there were several processes which were transforming

the system. Some of these, such as changes in the environment, weregradual and almost imperceptible. Others were more dramatic, likethe changes in agricultural technology and land use. These in turn

were shaped by and had an effect on the social and economic ties

between lords and vassals. Let us examine these processes one by one.The EnvironmentFrom the fifth to the tenth centuries, most of Europe was covered withvast forests. Thus the land available for agriculture was limited. Also,
peasants dissatisfied with their conditions could flee from oppressionand take refuge in the forest. Europe was undergoing an intenselycold climatic spell in this period. This led to severe and prolonged
winters, a shortened growing season for crops, and reduced yields
from agriculture.From the eleventh century, Europe entered a warm phase. Average
temperatures increased, which had a profound effect on agriculture.
Peasants now had a longer growing season and the soil, now less
subjected to frost, could be more easily ploughed. Environmental
historians have noted that there was a significant receding of the forest
line in many parts of Europe. This made expansion of the area under
cultivation possible.Land UseInitially, agricultural technology was very primitive. The onlymechanical aid available to the peasant was the wooden plough, drawn
by a team of oxen. This plough could at best scratch the surface of the
earth and was unable to fully draw out the natural productivity of thesoil. Agriculture was therefore very labour intensive. Fields had to beHever Castle,England, thirteenth
century.
143dug by hand, often once in four years, and enormous manual labour
was required.Also, an ineffective method of crop rotation was in use. The land
was divided in half, one field was planted in autumn with winter wheat,while the other field was left fallow. Rye was planted on this piece of
fallow land the next year while the other half was put to fallow. Withthis system, the soil slowly deteriorated, and famines were notuncommon. Chronic malnutrition alternated with devastating famines
and life was difficult for the poor.
Despite these hardships, the lords were anxious to maximise theirincomes. Since it was not possible to increase output from the land,
the peasants were forced to bring under cultivation all the land in themanorial estate, and spend more time doing this than they were legally
bound to do. The peasants did not bow quietly to oppression. Sincethey could not protest openly, they resorted to passive resistance.They spent more time cultivating their own fields, and kept much of
the product of that labour for themselves. They also avoided performing
unpaid extra services. They came into conflict with the lords over pastureand forest lands, and saw these lands as resources to be used by the
whole community, while the lords treated these as their private property.New Agricultural Technology
By the eleventh century, there is evidence of several technological changes.Instead of the basic wooden ploughs, cultivators began using heavyiron-tipped ploughs and mould-boards. These ploughs could dig muchdeeper and the mould-boards turned the topsoil properly. With this
the nutrients from the soil were better utilised.The methods of harnessing animals to the plough improved. Instead
of the neck-harness, the shoulder-harness came into use. This enabled
animals to exert greater power. Horses were now better shod, with iron
horseshoes, which prevented foot decay. There was increased use ofwind and water energy for agriculture. More water-powered and wind-

powered mills were set up all over Europe for purposes like millingcorn and pressing grapes.
There were also changes in land use. The most revolutionary one
was the switch from a two-field to a three-field system. In this, peasants
could use a field two years out of three if they planted it with one cropin autumn and a different crop in spring a year and a half later. That

meant that farmers could break their holdings into three fields. They
could plant one with wheat or rye in autumn for human consumption.The second could be used in spring to raise peas, beans and lentils for
human use, and oats and barley for the horses. The third field layfallow. Each year they rotated the use among the three fields.With these improvements, there was an almost immediate increasein the amount of food produced from each unit of land. Food availability THE THREE ORDERS
144THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYdoubled. The greater use of plants like peas and beans meant morevegetable proteins in the diet of the average European and a better
source of fodder for their animals. For cultivators, it meant betteropportunities. They could now produce more food from less land. Theaverage size of a peasant™s farm shrank from about 100 acres to 20 to

30 acres by the thirteenth century. Holdings which were smaller could
be more efficiently cultivated and reduced the amount of labour needed.

This gave the peasants time for other activities.Some of these technological changes cost a lot of money.Peasants did not have enough money to set up watermills and
windmills. Therefore the initiative was taken by the lords. But peasants
were able to take the initiative in many things, such as extending
arable land. They also switched to the three-field rotation of crops, and
set up small forges and smithies in the villages, where iron-tippedploughs and horseshoes were made and repaired cheaply.From the eleventh century, the personal bonds that had been thebasis of feudalism were weakening, because economic transactionswere becoming more and more money based. Lords found it convenient
to ask for rent in cash, not services, and cultivators were selling their
crops for money (instead of exchanging them for other goods) to traders,
who would then take such goods to be sold in the towns. The increasing
use of money began to influence prices, which became higher in times
of poor harvests. In England, for instance, agricultural prices doubled
between the 1270s and the 1320s.A Fourth Order? New Towns and Townspeople
Expansion in agriculture was accompanied by growth in three relatedareas: population, trade and towns. From roughly 42 million in 1000,
Europe™s population stood at 62 million around 1200 and 73 million in1300. Better food meant a longer lifespan. By the thirteenth century, anaverage European could expect to live 10 years longer than in the eighth
century. Women and girls had shorter lifespans compared to men because

the latter ate better food.The towns of the Roman Empire had become deserted and ruinedafter its fall. But from the eleventh century, as agriculture increasedand became able to sustain higher levels of population, towns began
to grow again. Peasants who had surplus grain to sell needed a place
where they could set up a selling centre and where they could buy
tools and cloth. This led to the growth of periodic fairs and small
marketing centres which gradually developed town-like features Œ atown square, a church, roads where merchants built shops andhomes, an office where those who governed the town could meet. In

other places, towns grew around large castles, bishops™ estates, or
large churches.In towns, instead of services, people paid a tax to the lords whoowned the land on which the town stood. Towns offered the prospect

145of paid work and freedom from the lord™s control, for young peoplefrom peasant families.‚Town air makes free™ was a popular saying. Many serfs craving to
be free ran away and hid in towns. If a serf could stay for one year and
one day without his lord discovering him, he would become a free
man. Many people in towns were free peasants or escaped serfs who

provided unskilled labour. Shopkeepers and merchants were numerous.

Later there was need for individuals with specialised skills, like bankersand lawyers. The bigger towns had populations of about 30,000. They
could be said to have formed a ‚fourth™ order.
The basis of economic organisation was the guild. Each craft orindustry was organised into a guild, an association which controlled
the quality of the product, its price and its sale. The ‚guild-hall™ was a
feature of every town; it was a building for ceremonial functions, andwhere the heads of all the guilds met formally. Guards patrolled the
town walls and musicians were called to play at feasts and in civic
processions, and innkeepers looked after travellers.By the eleventh century, new trade routes with West Asia were
developing (see Theme 5). Scandinavian merchants were sailing south
from the North Sea to exchange furs and hunting-hawks for cloth;
English traders came to sell tin. In France, by the twelfth century,
commerce and crafts began to grow. Earlier, craftsmen used to travel

from manor to manor; now they found it easier to settle in one place
where goods could be produced and traded for food. As the number of
towns grew and trade continued to expand, town merchants became
rich and powerful, and rivalled the power of the nobility.
ACTIVITY 3Look carefullyat this map andthe drawing of atown. Whatwould younotice asspecial featuresof medievalEuropeantowns? Howwere theydifferent fromtowns in otherplaces andother periods oftime?Reims, French cathedral-town, seventeenth-century map. THE THREE ORDERS
146THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYCathedral-townsOne of the ways that rich merchants spent their money was by makingdonations to churches. From the twelfth century, large churches Œ
called cathedrals Œ were being built in France. These belonged tomonasteries, but different groups of people contributed to their
construction with their own labour, materials or money. Cathedrals

were built of stone, and took many years to complete. As they were
being built, the area around the cathedrals became more populated,
and when they were completed they became centres of pilgrimage.Thus, small towns developed around them.Cathedrals were designed so that the priest™s voice could be heardclearly within the hall where large numbers of people gathered, and so
that the singing by monks could sound beautiful and the chimingbells calling people to prayer could be heardover a great distance. Stained glass wasused for windows. During the day thesunlight would make them radiant forpeople inside the cathedral, and aftersunset the light of candles would makethem visible to people outside. The stainedglass windows narrated the stories in theBible through pictures, which illiteratepeople could ‚read™.Salisbury Cathedral,England.
147‚Because of the inadequacy which we often felt on feast days, for the
narrowness of the place forced the women to run towards the altar
upon the heads of the men with much anguish and noisy confusion,[we decided] to enlarge and amplify the noble church–We also caused to be painted, by the exquisite hands of many
masters from different regions, a splendid variety of new windows–Because these windows are very valuable on account of their
wonderful execution and the profuse expenditure of painted glassand sapphire glass, we appointed an official master craftsman for
their protection, and also a goldsmith–who would receive their
allowances, namely, coins from the altar and flour from the common

storehouse of the brethren, and who would never neglect their duty,

to look after these [works of art].™Œ Abbot Suger (1081-1151) about the Abbey of St Denis, near Paris.
The Crisis of the Fourteenth Century
By the early fourteenth century, Europe™s economic expansion sloweddown. This was due to three factors.In northern Europe, by the end of the thirteenth century the warm
summers of the previous 300 years had given way to bitterly coldsummers. Seasons for growing crops were reduced by a month and it
became difficult to grow crops on higher ground. Storms and oceanic

flooding destroyed many farmsteads, which resulted in less income in

taxes for governments. The opportunities offered by favourable climatic
conditions before the thirteenth century had led to large-scale reclamation
of the land of forests and pastures for agriculture. But intensive ploughing
had exhausted the soil despite the practice of the three-field rotation of
crops, because clearance was not accompanied by proper soil
conservation. The shortage of pasturage reduced the number of cattle.
Population growth was outstripping resources, and the immediate resultwas famine. Severe famines hit Europe between 1315 and 1317, followedin the 1320s 
by massive cattle deaths.In addition, trade was hit by a severe shortage of metal moneybecause of a shortfall in the output of silver mines in Austria and
Serbia. This forced governments to reduce the silver content of the

currency, and to mix it with cheaper metals.The worst was yet to come. As trade expanded in the thirteenth andfourteenth centuries, ships carrying goods from distant countries had
started arriving in European ports. Along with the ships came rats Œ
carrying the deadly bubonic plague infection (the ‚Black Death™). Western

Europe, relatively isolated in earlier centuries, was hit by the epidemic
between 1347 and 1350. The modern estimate of mortality in that

epidemic is that 20 per cent of the people of the whole of Europe died,with some places losing as much as 40 per cent of the population.Stained-glass window,Chartres cathedral,
France, fifteenthcentury. THE THREE ORDERS
148THEMES IN WORLD HISTORY‚How many valiant men, how many fair ladies, (had) breakfast with
their kinfolk and the same night supped with their ancestors in the
next world! The condition of the people was pitiable to behold. Theysickened by the thousands daily, and died unattended and without
help. Many died in the open street, others dying in their houses, made
it known by the stench of their rotting bodies. Consecrated churchyards
did not suffice for the burial of the vast multitude of bodies, which
were heaped by the hundreds in vast trenches, like goods in a shipshold and covered with a little earth.™Œ Giovanni Boccaccio (1313-75), Italian author.
As trade centres, cities were the hardest hit. In enclosed communitieslike monasteries and convents, when one individual contracted theplague, it was not long before everyone did. And in almost every case,none survived. The plague took its worst toll among infants, the youngand the elderly. There were other relatively minor episodes of plague in
the 1360s and 1370s. The population of Europe, 73 million in 1300,
stood reduced to 45 million in 1400.This catastrophe, combined with the economic crisis, causedimmense social dislocation. Depopulation resulted in a major shortageof labour. Serious imbalances were created between agriculture and

manufacture, because there were not enough people to engage in both
equally. Prices of agricultural goods dropped as there were fewer people
to buy. Wage rates increased because the demand for labour, particularly

agricultural labour, rose in England by as much as 250 per cent in the
aftermath of the Black Death. The surviving labour force could now
demand twice their earlier wages.Social UnrestThe income of lords was thus badly hit. It declined as agricultural pricescame down and wages of labourers increased. In desperation, they tried
to give up the money-contracts they had entered into and revive labour-
services. This was violently opposed by peasants, particularly the better-
educated and more prosperous ones. In 1323, peasants revolted in
Flanders, in 1358 in France, and in 1381 in England.Though these rebellions were ruthlessly crushed, it is significant thatthey occurred with the most violent intensity in those areas which hadexperienced the prosperity of the economic expansion Œ a sign that
peasants were attempting to protect the gains they had made in previous
centuries. Despite the severe repression, the sheer intensity of peasant
opposition ensured that the old feudal relations could not be reimposed.
The money economy was too far advanced to be reversed. Therefore,
though the lords succeeded in crushing the revolts, the peasants ensuredthat the feudal privileges of earlier days could not be reinvented.
149Eleventh to Fourteenth Centuries1066Normans defeat Anglo-Saxons and conquer England1100 ONWARDS
Cathedrals being built in France1315Œ17Great famine in Europe1347Œ50Black Death1338Œ1461Hundred Years War between England and France
1381Peasants™ revoltsPolitical ChangesDevelopments in the political sphere paralleled social processes. In thefifteenth and sixteenth centuries, European kings strengthened their
military and financial power. The powerful new states they created
were as significant for Europe as the economic changes that wereoccurring. Historians have therefore called these kings ‚the new
monarchs™. Louis XI in France, Maximilian in Austria, Henry VII in
England and Isabelle and Ferdinand in Spain were absolutist rulers,
who  started the process oforganising standing armies, a
permanent bureaucracy and

national taxation and, in Spain and
Portugal, began to play a role in
Europe™s expansion overseas (see
Theme 8).The most important reason for thetriumph of these monarchies was
the social changes which had taken
place in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. The dissolution of the
feudal system of lordship and
vassalage, and the slow rate of
economic growth had given the first
opportunity to kings to increase
their control over their powerful and

not-so-powerful subjects. Rulers

dispensed with the system of feudal
levies for their armies and
introduced professionally trained
infantry equipped with guns and
siege artillery (see Theme 5) directly
under their control. The resistance
of the aristocracies crumbled in the
face of the firepower of the kings.ACTIVITY 4Read through theevents andprocesses listedwith dates, andconnect them intoa narrativeaccount.Queen Elizabeth I ofEngland at a picnic,
late sixteenth century. THE THREE ORDERS
150THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYThe New Monarchy1461Œ1559    New monarchs in France1474Œ1556    New monarchs in Spain1485Œ1547    New monarchs in EnglandBy increasing taxes, monarchs got enough revenues to support largerarmies and thus defended and expanded their frontiers and overcame
internal resistance to royal authority. Centralisation, however, did not
occur without resistance from the aristocracy. A common thread runningthrough all types of opposition to the monarchies was the question of
taxation. In England, rebellions occurred and were put down in 1497,
1536, 1547, 1549 and 1553. In France, Louis XI (1461-83) had to wage

a long struggle against dukes and princes. Lesser nobles, often membersof local assemblies, resisted this royal usurpation of their powers. The
‚religious™ wars in France in the sixteenth century were in part a contest
between royal privileges and regional liberties.The nobility managed a tactical shift in order to ensure their survival.From being opponents to the new regimes, they quickly transformed

themselves into loyalists. It is for this reason that royal absolutism hasbeen called a modified form of feudalism.

Precisely the same class of people who had been
rulers in the feudal system Œ the lords Œ
continued to dominate the political scene. They
were given permanent positions in the

administrative service. But the new regimes
were different in some important ways.
The king was no longer at the apex of apyramid where loyalty had been a matter of
personal dependence and trust. He was now at
the centre of an elaborate courtier society and
a network of patronŒclient relationships. All
monarchies, weak or powerful, needed the
cooperation of those who could command authority. Patronage becamethe means of ensuring such cooperation. And patronage could be given
or obtained by means of money. Therefore money became an important
way in which non-aristocratic elements like merchants and bankers
could gain access to the court. They lent money to the kings, who used
it to pay the wages of soldiers. Rulers thus made space for non-feudal
elements in the state system.The later history of France and England was to be shaped by thesechanges in the power structures. In the reign of the child-king Louis
XIII of France, in 1614, a meeting was held of the French consultative
assembly, known as the Estates-General (with three houses to represent
the three estates/orders Œ clergy, nobility, and the rest). After this, itNemours Castle,France, fifteenth
century.
151was not summoned again for nearly two centuries, till 1789, becausethe kings did not want to share power with the three orders.What happened in England was very different. Even before the
Norman Conquest, the Anglo-Saxons had a Great Council, which the
king had to consult before imposing any tax. This developed into what
was called the Parliament, which consisted of the House of Lords, the
members of which were the lords and the clergy, and the House of
Commons, representing towns and rural areas. King Charles I ruledfor 11 years (1629Œ40) without calling Parliament. When he was forced
to call it, because he needed money, a section of Parliament decided to
go to war against him, and later executed him and established a republic.
This did not last long, and monarchy was restored, but on the condition
that Parliament would be called regularly. Today, France has a republican form of government and England
has a monarchy. This is because of the different directions that the

histories of the two countries took after the seventeenth century.ExercisesANSWER IN BRIEF1.Describe two features of early feudal society in France.
2.How did long-term changes in population levels affect
economy and society in Europe?3.Why did knights become a distinct group, and when did they
decline?4.What was the function of medieval monasteries?
ANSWER IN A SHORT
 ESSAY
5.Imagine and describe a day in the life of a craftsman in a
medieval French town.6.Compare the conditions of life for a French serf and a Roman
slave. THE THREE ORDERS
152THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYTHEME7Changing Cultural
Traditions
FROM the fourteenth to the end of the seventeenth century,
towns were growing in many countries of Europe. A distinct
‚urban culture™ also developed. Townspeople began to thinkof themselves as more ‚civilised™ than rural people. Towns Œparticularly Florence, Venice and Rome Œ became centres of

art and learning. Artists and writers were patronised by the

rich and the aristocratic. The invention of printing at the same
time made books and prints available to many people,including those living in distant towns or countries. A sense
of history also developed in Europe, and people contrasted
their ‚modern™ world with the ‚ancient™ one of the Greeks and

Romans.Religion came to be seen as something which eachindividual should choose for himself. The church™s earth-centric belief was overturned by scientists who began to
understand the solar system, and new geographical
knowledge overturned the Europe-centric view that the

Mediterranean Sea was the centre of the world.
(see Theme 8)There is a vast amount of material on European history fromthe fourteenth century Œ documents, printed books, paintings,
sculptures, buildings, textiles. Much of this has beencarefully preserved in archives, art galleries and museumsin Europe and America.From the nineteenth century, historians used the term
‚Renaissance™ (literally, rebirth) to describe the cultural
changes of this period. The historian who emphasised thesemost was a Swiss scholar Œ Jacob Burckhardt (1818Œ97) of
the University of Basle in Switzerland. He was a student of
the German historian Leopold von Ranke (1795Œ1886).

Ranke had taught him that the primary concern of the

historian was to write about states and politics using papers
and files of government departments. Burckhardt was
dissatisfied with these very limited goals that his master hadset out for him. To him politics was not the be-all and end-
all in history writing. History was as much concerned with

culture as with politics.In 1860, he wrote a book called The Civilisation of theRenaissance in Italy, in which he called his readers™ attentionto literature, architecture and painting to tell the story of how
a new ‚humanist™ culture had flowered in Italian towns from
153the fourteenth to the seventeenth century. This culture, hewrote, was characterised by a new belief Œ that man, as an
individual, was capable of making his own decisions anddeveloping his skills. He was ‚modern™, in contrast to
‚medieval™ man whose thinking had been controlled by the
church.The Revival of Italian CitiesAfter the fall of the western Roman Empire, many of the towns that
had been political and cultural centres in Italy fell into ruin. There was
no unified government, and the Pope in Rome, who was sovereign in
his own state, was not a strong political figure.While western Europe was being reshaped by feudal bonds and
unified under the Latin Church, and eastern Europe under the
Byzantine Empire, and Islam was creating a common civilisation
further west, Italy was weak and fragmented. However, it was these
very developments that helped in the revival of Italian culture.With the expansion of trade between the Byzantine Empire and theIslamic countries, the ports on the Italian coast revived. From the
twelfth century, as the Mongols opened up trade with China via the
Silk Route (see Theme 5) and as trade with western European countries
 CHANGING CULTURAL TRADITIONSMAP 1: The ItalianStates
154THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYalso increased, Italian towns played a central role. They no longer sawthemselves as part of a powerful empire, but as independent city-

states. Two of these Œ Florence and Venice Œ were republics, and many
others were court-cities, ruled by princes.One of the most vibrant cities was Venice, another was Genoa. They
were different from other parts of Europe Œ the clergy were not politically
dominant here, nor were there powerful feudal lords. Rich merchants

and bankers actively participated in governing the city, and this helped
the idea of citizenship to strike root. Even when these towns were
ruled by military despots, the pride felt by the townspeople in being
citizens did not weaken.The City-StateCardinal Gasparo Contarini (1483-1542) writes about the democratic governmentof his city-state in The Commonwealth and Government of Venice 
(1534).‚–to come to the institution of our Venetian commonwealth, the whole authority
of the city–is in that council, into which all the gentlemen of the City being oncepast the age of 25 years are admitted...Now first I am to yield you a reckoning how and with what wisdom it wasordained by our ancestors, that the common people should not be admitted intothis company of citizens, in whoseauthority [lies] the whole power of
the commonwealth... Because many
troubles and popular tumults arise
in those cities, whose government is
swayed by the common people–
many were of contrary opinion,
deeming that it would do well, if
this manner of governing the
commonwealth should rather be
defined by ability and abundance
of riches. Contrariwise the honest
citizens, and those that are liberally
brought up, oftentimes fall to
poverty...  Therefore our wise and

prudent ancestors... ordered that this
definition of the public rule should
go rather by the nobility of lineage,than by the estimation of wealth: yet with that temperature [proviso], that men of
chief and supreme nobility should not have this rule alone (for that would rather
have been the power of a few than a commonwealth) but also every other citizenwhosoever not ignobly born: so that all which were noble by birth, or ennobled
by virtue, did...obtain this right of government.™G. Bellini™s ‚The Recovery of the Relic of the HolyCross™ was painted in 1500, to recall an event of
1370, and is set in fifteenth-century Venice.

155The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries1300Humanism taught at Padua University in Italy1341Petrarch given title of ‚Poet Laureate™ in Rome1349University established in Florence1390Geoffrey Chaucer™s 
Canterbury Tales 
published1436Brune
lleschi designs the Duomo in Florence1453Ottoman Turks defeat the Byzantine ruler of Constantinople
1454Gutenberg prints the Bible with movable type1484Portuguese mathematicians calculate latitude by observingthe sun1492Columbus reaches America1495Leonardo da Vinci paints The Last Supper1512Michelangelo paints the Sistine Chapel ceilingUniversities and HumanismThe earliest universities in Europe had been set up in Italian towns. Theuniversities of Padua and Bologna had been centres of legal studies
from the eleventh century. Commerce being the chief activity in the city,there was an increasing demand for lawyers and notaries (a combinationof solicitor and record-keeper) to write and interpret rules and written
agreements without which trade on a large scale was not possible. Law
was therefore a popular subject of study, but there was now a shift in
emphasis. It was studied in the context of earlier Roman culture.Francesco Petrarch (1304-78) represented this change. To Petrarch,

antiquity was a distinctive civilisation which could be best understood
through the actual words of the ancient Greeks and Romans. He
therefore stressed the importance of a close reading of ancient authors.This educational programme implied that there was much to belearnt which religious teaching alone could not give. This was the
culture which historians in the nineteenth century were to label‚humanism™. By the early fifteenth century, the term ‚humanist™

was used for masters who taught grammar, rhetoric, poetry,

history and moral philosophy. The Latin word humanitas,from which ‚humanities™ was derived, had been used many
centuries ago by the Roman lawyer and essayist Cicero
(106-43 BCE), a contemporary of Julius Caesar, to mean culture.
These subjects were not drawn from or connected with religion,and emphasised skills developed by individuals through discussionand debate.ACTIVITY 1Locate Venice
on the map ofItaly, and lookcarefully at thepainting onp. 154. Howwould youdescribe thecity, and in whatways was itdifferent from acathedral-town? CHANGING CULTURAL TRADITIONS
156THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYGiovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463-94), a humanist of Florence, wroteon the importance of debate in On the Dignity of Man (1486).‚For [Plato and Aristotle] it was certain that, for the attainment of
the knowledge of truth they were always seeking for themselves,nothing is better than to attend as often as possible the exercise of
debate. For just as bodily energy is strengthened by gymnastic
exercise, so beyond doubt in this wrestling-place of letters, as it were,
energy of mind becomes far stronger and more vigorous.™
These revolutionary ideas attracted attention in many otheruniversities, particularly in the newly established university in Petrarch™sown home-town of Florence. Till the end of the thirteenth century,

this city had not made a mark as a centre of trade or of learning, but

things changed dramatically in the fifteenth century. A city is known
by its great citizens as much as by its wealth, and Florence had cometo be known because of Dante Alighieri (1265-1321), a layman whowrote on religious themes, and Giotto (1267-1337), an artist who
painted lifelike portraits, very different from the stiff figures done by

earlier artists. From then it developed as the most exciting intellectual
city in Italy and as a centre of artistic creativity. The term ‚Renaissance

Man™ is often used to describe a person with many interests and skills,
because many of the individuals who became well known at this time
were people of many parts. They were scholar-diplomat-theologian-

artist combined in one.The Humanist View of History
Humanists thought that they were restoring ‚true civilisation™ aftercenturies of darkness, for they believed that a ‚dark age™ had set in
after the collapse of the Roman Empire. Following them, later scholarsunquestioningly assumed that a ‚new age™ had begun in Europe fromthe fourteenth century. The term ‚Middle Ages™/‚medieval period™ was
Florence, a sketchmade in 1470.Giotto™s painting of thechild Jesus, Assissi,
Italy.
157used for the millennium (thousand years) after the fall of Rome. In the‚Middle Ages™, they argued, the Church had had such complete control
over men™s minds that all the learning of the Greeks and Romans had
been blotted out. The humanists used the word ‚modern™ for the period
from the fifteenth century.Periodisation used by humanists and by later scholars5thŒ14th centuryThe Middle Ages
5thŒ9th centuryThe Dark Ages
9thŒ11th centuryThe Early Middle Ages
11thŒ14th centuryThe Late Middle Ages
15th century onwardsThe M
odern Age
Recently, historians have questioned this division. With more researchbeing done and more being found out about Europe in this period,scholars are increasingly reluctant to make sharp divisions betweencenturies in terms of being culturally vibrant or otherwise. It seems
unfair to label any period as the ‚Dark Ages™.Science and Philosophy:The Arabs™ ContributionMuch of the writings of the Greeks and Romans had been familiar to
monks and clergymen through the ‚Middle Ages™, but they had not
made these widely known. In the fourteenth century, many scholarsbegan to read translated works of Greek writers like Plato and Aristotle.For this they were indebted not to their own scholars but to Arab
translators who had carefully preserved and translated ancient
manuscripts (Plato was Aflatun, and Aristotle Aristu in Arabic).While some European scholars read Greek in Arabic translation, theGreeks translated works of Arabic and Persian scholars for furthertransmission to other Europeans. These were works on natural science,
mathematics, astronomy, medicine and chemistry. Ptolemy™s Almagest(a work on astronomy, written in Greek before 140 CE and later translatedinto Arabic) carries the Arabic definite article ‚al™, which brings out theArabic connection. Among the Muslim writers who were regarded as menof wisdom in the Italian world were Ibn Sina* (‚Avicenna™ in Latin, 980-1037), an Arab physician and philosopher of Bukhara in Central Asia,
and al-Razi (‚Rhazes™), author of a medical encyclopaedia. Ibn Rushd
(‚Averroes™ in Latin, 1126-98), an Arab philosopher of Spain, tried to

resolve the tension between philosophical knowledge (
faylasuf
) andreligious beliefs. His method was adopted by Christian thinkers.Humanists reached out to people in a variety of ways. Though thecurricula in universities continued to be dominated by law, medicineand theology, humanist subjects slowly began to be introduced in
schools, not just in Italy but in other European countries as well.*The Europeanspelling of theseindividuals™ namesmade latergenerations thinkthey wereEuropeans!Schools at thistime were onlyfor boys. CHANGING CULTURAL TRADITIONS
158THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYArtists and RealismFormal education was not the only way through which humanists
shaped the minds of their age. Art, architecture and books were
wonderfully effective in transmitting humanist ideas.
‚ ﬁArtﬂ is embedded in nature; he who can extract it, hasit– Moreover, you may demonstrate much of your work

by geometry. The more closely your work abides by life
in its form, so much the better will it appear–No man
shall ever be able to make a beautiful figure    out of his
own imagination unless he has well stored his mind by
much copying from life.™Œ Albrecht Durer (1471-1528)This sketch by Durer (Praying Hands) gives us a senseof Italian culture in the sixteenth century, when people
were deeply religious, but also had a sense of confidencein man™s ability to achieve near-perfection and to unravel
the mysteries of the world and the universe.Artists were inspired by studying works of the past. The materialremains of Roman culture were sought with as much excitement asancient texts: a thousand years afterthe fall of Rome, fragments of art were
discovered in the ruins of ancient Rome
and other deserted cities. Their
admiration for the figures of ‚perfectly™

proportioned men and women sculpted
so many centuries ago, made Italian
sculptors want to continue that
tradition. In 1416, Donatello (1386-
1466) broke new ground with his lifelike
statues.Artists™ concern to be accurate was
helped by the work of scientists. To
study bone structures, artists went to
the laboratories of medical schools.
Andreas Vesalius (1514-64), a Belgian
and a professor of medicine at the
University of Padua, was the first to
dissect the human body. This was the
beginning of modern physiology.
‚Praying Hands™, brush drawing by Durer, 1508.
‚The Pieta™ byMichelangelo depicts
Mary holding the body
of Jesus.
