49iiAn Empire Across Three ContinentsThe Central Islamic LandsNomadic Empires empires

50THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYOVER the two millennia that followed the establishmentof empires in Mesopotamia, various attempts at empire-building took place across the region and in the area to thewest and east of it.By the sixth century BCE, Iranians had established control overmajor parts of the Assyrian empire.  Networks of trade developed
overland, as well as along the coasts of the Mediterranean Sea.In the eastern Mediterranean, Greek cities and their colonies benefited
from improvements in trade that were the result of these changes.They also benefited from close trade with nomadic people to the northof the Black Sea. In Greece, for the most part, city-states such asAthens and Sparta were the focus of civic life. From among the Greekstates, in the late fourth century BCE, the ruler of the kingdom ofMacedon, Alexander, undertook a series of military campaigns and
conquered parts of North Africa, West Asia and Iran, reaching up to
the Beas. Here, his soldiers refused to proceed further east. Alexander™stroops retreated, though many Greeks stayed behind.Throughout the area under Alexander™s control, ideals and culturaltraditions were shared amongst the Greeks and the local population.The region on the whole became ‚Hellenised™ (the Greeks were called
Hellenes), and Greek became a well-known language throughout. The
political unity of Alexander™s empire disintegrated quickly after hisdeath, but for almost three centuries after, Hellenistic culture remained
important in the area. The period is often referred to as the ‚Hellenistic
period™ in the history of the region, but this ignores the way in which
other cultures (especially Iranian culture associated with the old empireof Iran) were as important as Œ if not often more important than ŒHellenistic notions and ideas.This section deals with important aspects of what happened afterthis.Small but well-organised military forces of the central Italian city-state of Rome took advantage of the political discord that followed thedisintegration of Alexander™s empire and established control over North

Africa and the eastern Mediterranean from the second century 
BCE.empires

51At the time, Rome was a republic. Government was based on a complex
system of election, but its political institutions gave some importanceto birth and wealth and society benefited from slavery. The forces ofRome established a network for trade between the states that hadonce been part of Alexander™s empire. In the middle of the first centuryBCE, under Julius Caesar, a high-born military commander, this
‚Roman Empire™ was extended 
to present
-day Britain and Germany.
 Latin (spoken in Rome) was the main language of the empire,
though many in the east continued to use Greek, and the Romans

had a great respect for Hellenic culture.  There were changes in thepolitical structure of the empire from the late 
first century BCE, and itwas substantially Christianised after the emperor Constantine becamea Christian in the fourth century ce.
To make government easier, the Roman Empire was divided into
eastern and western halves in the fourth century 
CE. But in the west,there was a breakdown of the arrangements that existed between Rome
and the tribes in frontier areas (Goths, Visigoths, Vandals and others).
These arrangements dealt with trade, military recruitment andEMPIRESRuins at Greek city ofCorinth.
52THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYsettlement, and the tribes increasingly attacked the Romanadministration. Conflicts increased in scale, and coincided with internal

dissensions in the empire, leading the collapse of the empire in thewest by the fifth century CE. Tribes established their own kingdoms
within the former empire, though, with the prompting of the Christian
Church, a Holy Roman Empire was formed from some of these
kingdoms from the ninth century CE. This claimed some continuitywith the Roman Empire.Between the seventh century and the fifteenth century, almost allthe lands of the eastern Roman Empire (centred on Constantinople)
came to be taken over by the Arab empire Œ created by the followers of
the Prophet Muhammad (who founded the faith of Islam in the seventh
century) and centred on Damascus Œ or by its successors (who ruled
from Baghdad initially). There was a close interaction between Greekand Islamic traditions in the region.  The trading networks of the area
and its prosperity attracted the attention of pastoral peoples to the
north including various Turkic tribes, who often attacked the cities of
the region and established control. The last of these peoples to attack
the area and attempt to control it were the Mongols, under Genghis
Khan and his successors, who moved into West Asia, Europe, Central
Asia and China in the thirteenth century.All these attempts to make and maintain empires were driven bythe search to control the resources of the trading networks that existedin the region as a whole, and to derive benefit from the links of the
region with other areas such as India or China. All the empires evolved
administrative systems to give stability to trade. They also evolvedThe Great Mosque,Damascus, completed
in 714.
53EMPIRESdifferent types of military organisation. The  achievements of one empire
were often taken up by its successor. Over time, the area came to be

marked by Persian, Greek, Latin and Arabic above many other languagesthat were spoken and written.The empires were not very stable. This was partly due to disputesand conflict over resources in various regions. It was also due to thecrisis that developed in relations between empires and pastoral peoples
to the north Œ from whom empires derived support both for their tradeand to provide them with labour for production of manufactures and
for their armies. It is worth noting that not all empires were city-

centric. The Mongol empire of Genghis Khan and his successors is a
good example of how an empire could be maintained by pastoral people
for a long time and with success.Religions that appealed to peoples of different ethnic origins, who
often spoke different languages, were important in the making of large

empires. This was true in the case of Christianity (which originated in
Palestine in the early first century CE) and Islam (which originated inthe seventh century CE).
54THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYTimeline  ii(C. 100 BCE TO 1300 CE)This timeline focuses on kingdoms and empires. Some ofthese such as the Roman empire were very large,spreading across three continents. This was also thetime when some of the major religious and culturaltraditions developed. It was a time when institutions ofintellectual activity emerged. Books were written andideas travelled across continents. Some things that arenow part of our everyday lives were used for the firsttime during this period.
55DATES
100-50 BCE50-11-50 CE50-100
100-150150-200200-250250-300300-350350-400400-450450-500
500-550550-600600-650650-700700-750750-800800-850850-900900-950950-10001000-1050
1050-1100
1100-1150

1150-1200
1200-12501250-1300AFRICABananas introduced from Southeast Asiato East Africa through sea routesCleopatra, queen of Egypt (51-30 BCE)Hero of Alexandria makes a machine thatruns on steamPtolemy of Alexandria writes a work ongeography.
Christianity introduced in Axum* (330)Vandals from Europe set up a kingdom in
North Africa (429)Emigration (hijra) of some Muslims toAbyssinia (615)
Muslim Arabs sign treaty with Nubia,south of Egypt (652)Rise of kingdom in GhanaAlmoravid kingdom (1056-1147) extends
from Ghana to southern SpainZimbabwe (1120-1450) emerges as a centre
for the production of gold and copperartefacts, and of long-distance tradeChristian churches established in Ethiopia(1200), kingdom of Mali in West Africa, with
Timbuktu as a centre of learning
EUROPESpartacus leads revolt of about 100,000slaves (73 BCE).Building of Colosseum in RomeRoman empire at is peak*Constantine becomes emperor,
establishes city of Constantinople
Roman empire divided into eastern andwestern halvesRoman empire invaded by tribes from
North and Central EuropeConversion of Clovis of Gaul (France) toChristianity (496)
St Benedict establishes a monastery inItaly (526), St Augustine introducesChristianity in England (596), Gregory the
Great (590) lays the foundations of thepower of the Roman Catholic ChurchBede writes the History of the EnglishChurch and PeopleCharlemagne, King of the Franks, crownedHoly Roman Emperor (800)
First Russian states founded at Kiev andNovgorod.Viking raids across Western EuropeMedical school set up in Salerno, Italy (1030)William of Normandy invades England andbecomes king (1066). Proclamation of thefirst Crusade (1095)Construction of the cathedral of Notre Damebegins (1163)
St Francis of Assisi sets up a monasticorder, emphasizing austerity and

compassion (1209)Lords in England rebel against the kingwho  signs the Magna Carta, accepting to
rule according to lawEstablishment of the Hapsburg dynastythat continued to rule Austria till 1918TIMELINE-II
56THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYDATES
100-50 BCE50-11-50 CE50-100100-150150-200200-250250-300300-350
350-400400-450450-500500-550550-600600-650650-700700-750750-800800-850850-900
900-950950-10001000-10501050-1100
1100-1150
1150-1200
1200-12501250-1300ASIAHan empire in China, development of theSilk Route from Asia to EuropeJesus Christ in Judaea, a province of theRoman empire, Roman invasion of Arabia (24)Paper invented in China (118), development
of the first seismograph (132)End of Han empire (221), Sasanid rule inPersia (226)
Tea at the royal court, China (262), use of
the magnetic compass, China (270)Chinese start using stirrups while riding
horses*Buddhism introduced in Japan (594)Grand canal to transport grain built inChina(584-618), by 5,000,000 workersover 34 years.
The Tang dynasty in China (618)
Prophet Muhammad goes to Medina, thebeginning of the Hijri era ( 622)
Collapse of the Sasanian empire (642)The Umayyad caliphate (661-750)A branch of the Umayyads conquers
Spain, Tang dynasty established in China.
Abbasid caliphate established andBaghdad becomes a major cultural andcommercial centreKhmer state founded in Cambodia (802)The first printed book, China (868)Use of paper money in ChinaIbn Sina, a Persian doctor, writes a

medical text that is followed for centuriesEstablishment of the Turkish empire by
Alp Arslan (1075)First recorded display of fireworks inChina
Angkor empire, Cambodia, at its height(1180), temple complex at Angkor Wat
Genghis Khan consolidates power (1206)
Qubilai Khan, grandson of Genghis,becomes emperor of ChinaSOUTH ASIABactrian Greeks and Shakas establishkingdoms in the northwest, the rise of the
Satavahanas in the DeccanGrowing trade between South Asia,Southeast and East Asia, and EuropeThe establishment of Kushana state in thenorth west and Central AsiaThe establishment of the Gupta* dynasty(320)Fa Xian travels from China to India (399)Aryabhata, astronomer and mathematicianChalukya temples in Badami and AiholeXuan Zang travels from China to India,Nalanda emerges as an importanteducational centreArabs conquer Sind (712)Mahmud of Ghazni raids the northwest,Alberuni travels to India, Rajarajesvaratemple built at ThanjavurKalhana writes the RajataranginiEstablishment of Delhi sultanate (1206)Amir Khusrau (1253-1325) introduces newforms of poetry and music*, Sun temple atKonark
57DATES
100-50 BCE50-11-50 CE50-100100-150150-200200-250250-300300-350350-400400-450
450-500500-550550-600
600-650650-700700-750
750-800800-850850-900
900-950950-10001000-10501050-1100
1100-1150
1150-1200
1200-1250
1250-1300AMERICASCity-state of Teotihuacan established in
Mexico, with pyramid temples, Mayanceremonial centres*, development ofastronomy, pictorial script
*The first city is built in North America(c.990)AUSTRALIA/PACIFIC ISLANDS
Maori navigator from Polynesia ‚discovers™New ZealandSweet potato (originally from SouthAmerica), grown in the Polynesian islandsACTIVITYTry and identify
at least 5 events/processes thatwould haveinvolved themovement ofpeoples acrossregions/continents. Whatwould have beenthe significanceof these events/processes?TIMELINE-II
58THEMES IN WORLD HISTORY3An Empire
 Across
Three ContinentsTHE Roman Empire covered a vast stretch of territory thatincluded most of Europe as we know it today and a large
part of the Fertile Crescent and North Africa. In this chapterwe shall look at the way this empire was organised, thepolitical forces that shaped its destiny, and the social groups
into which people were divided. You will see that the empire

embraced a wealth of local cultures and languages; that
women had a stronger legal position then than they do inmany countries today; but also that much of the economy
was run on slave labour, denying freedom to substantial

numbers of persons. From the fifth century on, the empire fell
apart in the west but remained intact and exceptionally
prosperous in its eastern half. The caliphate which you will

read about in the next chapter built on this prosperity andinherited its urban and religious traditions.Roman historians have a rich collection of sources to go on,which we can broadly divide into three groups: (a) texts,
(b) documents and (c) material remains. Textual sourcesinclude histories of the period written by contemporaries (thesewere usually called ‚Annals™, because the narrative was
constructed on a year-by-year basis), letters, speeches,

sermons, laws, and so on. Documentary sources include

mainly inscriptions and papyri. Inscriptions were usually cuton stone, so a large number survive, in both Greek and Latin.
The ‚papyrus™ was a reed-like plant that grew along the banks
of the Nile in Egypt and was processed to produce a writing
material that was very widely used in everyday life. Thousands
of contracts, accounts, letters and official documents survive
‚on papyrus™ and have been published by scholars who arecalled ‚papyrologists™. Material remains include a very wideassortment of items that mainly archaeologists discover (for
example, through excavation and field survey), for example,
buildings, monuments and other kinds of structures, pottery,
coins, mosaics, even entire landscapes (for example, through
the use of aerial photography). Each of these sources can only
tell us just so much about the past, and combining them can
be a fruitful exercise, but how well this is done depends on
the historian™s skill!THEMEPapyrus scrolls.
59Two powerful empires ruled over most of Europe,North Africa and the
Middle East in the period between the birth of Christ and the early part
of the seventh century, say, down to the 630s. The two empires werethose of Rome and Iran. The Romans and Iranians were rivals andfought against each other for much of their history. Their empires lay
next to each other, separated only by a narrow strip of land that ran

along the river Euphrates. In this chapter we shall be looking at the
Roman Empire, but we shall also refer, in passing, to Rome™s rival, Iran.
If you look at the map, you will see that the continents of Europe andAfrica are separated by a sea that stretches all the way from Spain in thewest to Syria in the east. This sea is called the Mediterranean, and it was
the heart of Rome™s empire. Rome dominated the Mediterranean and all
the regions around that sea in both directions, north as well as south.
To the north, the boundaries of the empire were formed by two great
rivers, the Rhine and the Danube; to the south, by the huge expanse ofdesert called the Sahara. This vast stretch of territory was the RomanEmpire. Iran controlled the whole area south of the Caspian Sea down
to eastern Arabia, and sometimes large parts of Afghanistan as well.

These two superpowers had divided up most of the world that the Chinese
called Ta Ch™in (‚greater Ch™in™, roughly the west).AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTSMAP 1: Europe andNorth Africa
60THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYThe Early EmpireThe Roman Empire can broadly be divided into two phases, ‚early™ and‚late™, divided by the third century as a sort of historical watershed
between them. In other words, the whole period down to the main partof the third century can be called the ‚early empire™, and the periodafter that the ‚late empire™.A major difference between the two superpowers and their respective
empires was that the Roman Empire was culturally much more diverse
than that of Iran. The Parthians and later the Sasanians, the dynastiesthat ruled Iran in this period, ruled over a population that was largely
Iranian. The Roman Empire, by contrast, was a mosaic of territories
and cultures that were chiefly bound together by a common system of
government. Many languages were spoken in the empire, but for the

purposes of administration Latin and Greek were the most widely used,
indeed the only languages. The upper classes of the east spoke andwrote in Greek, those of the west in Latin, and the boundary between
these broad language areas ran somewhere across the middle of the
Mediterranean, between the African provinces of Tripolitania (which

was Latin speaking) and Cyrenaica (Greek-speaking). All those who
lived in the empire were subjects of a single ruler, the emperor, regardless

of where they lived and what language they spoke.The regime established by Augustus, the first emperor, in 27 
BCEwas called the ‚Principate™. Although Augustus was the sole ruler andthe only real source of authority, the fiction was kept alive that he was
actually only the ‚leading citizen™ (Princeps in Latin), not the absoluteruler. This was done out of respect for the Senate, the body which had
controlled Rome earlier, in the days when it was a Republic.* The

Senate had existed in Rome for centuries, and had been and remained
a body representing the aristocracy, that is, the wealthiest families of
Roman and, later, Italian descent, mainly landowners. Most of the
Roman histories that survive in Greek and Latin were written by people
from a senatorial background. From these it is clear that emperors
were judged by how they behaved towards the Senate. The worst
emperors were those who were hostile to the senatorial class, behaving
with suspicion or brutality and violence. Many senators yearned to go

back to the days of the Republic, but most must have realised that thiswas impossible.Next to the emperor and the Senate, the other key institution ofimperial rule was the army. Unlike the army of its rival in the Persian
empire, which was a conscripted** army, the Romans had a paid

professional army where soldiers had to put in a minimum of 25 years

of service. Indeed, the existence of a paid army was a distinctive feature

of the Roman Empire. The army was the largest single organised body

in the empire (600,000 by the fourth century) and it certainly had the
power to determine the fate of emperors. The soldiers would constantly

agitate for better wages and service conditions. These agitations often*The Republic wasthe name for aregime in which thereality of power laywith the Senate, abody dominated by asmall group ofwealthy families whoformed the ‚nobility™.In practice, theRepublic representedthe government ofthe nobility,exercised through thebody called theSenate. The Republiclasted from 509 BC to27 BC, when it wasoverthrown byOctavian, theadopted son and heirof Julius Caesar, who
later changed hisname to Augustus.Membership of theSenate was for life,and wealth andoffice-holdingcounted for morethan birth. **A conscriptedarmy is one which isforcibly recruited;military service iscompulsory forcertain groups orcategories of thepopulation.
61took the form of mutinies, if the soldiers
felt let down by their generals or even the
emperor. Again, our picture of the Roman
army depends largely on the way they were
portrayed by historians with senatorial
sympathies. The Senate hated and feared
the army, because it was a source of often-

unpredictable violence, especially in thetense conditions of the third century when
government was forced to tax more heavily

to pay for its mounting military
expenditures.To sum up, the emperor, the aristocracy
and the army were the three main ‚players™
in the political history of the empire. Thesuccess of individual emperors depended
on their control of the army, and when the

armies were divided, the result usually was

civil war*. Except for one notorious year (69 CE), when four emperorsmounted the throne in quick succession, the first two centuries wereon the whole free from civil war and in this sense relatively stable.Succession to the throne was based as far as possible on family descent,either natural or adoptive, and even the army was strongly wedded to

this principle. For example, Tiberius (14-37 
CE), the second in the longline of Roman emperors, was not the natural son of Augustus, theruler who founded the Principate, but Augustus adopted him to ensurea smooth transition.External warfare was also much less common in the first two
centuries. The empire inherited by Tiberius from Augustus was already
so vast that further expansion was felt to be unnecessary. In fact, the
‚Augustan age™ is remembered for the peace it ushered in after decadesof internal strife and centuries of military conquest. The only major
campaign of expansion in the early empire was Trajan™s fruitless

occupation of territory across the Euphrates, in the years 113-17 CEabandoned by his successors.*Civil war refers toarmed struggles forpower within thesame country, incontrast to conflictsbetween differentcountries.The Emperor Trajan™s Dream Œ A Conquest of India?
Then, after a winter (115/16) in Antioch marked by a great earthquake, in 116Trajan marched down the Euphrates to Ctesiphon, the Parthian capital, and then

to the head of the Persian Gulf. There [the historian] Cassius Dio describes himlooking longingly at a merchant-ship setting off for India, and wishing that hewere as young as Alexander.
Œ Fergus Millar, 
The Roman Near East.Shops in ForumJulium, Rome. This
piazza with columnswas built after 51BCE, to enlarge the
older Roman Forum.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTS
62THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYMuch more characteristic was the gradual extension of Roman directrule. This was accomplished by absorbing a whole series of ‚dependent™kingdoms into Roman provincial territory. The Near East was full ofsuch kingdoms*, but by the early second century those which lay westof the Euphrates (towards Roman territory) had disappeared, swallowed
up by Rome. (Incidentally, some of these kingdoms were exceedingly
wealthy, for example Herod™s kingdom yielded the equivalent of 5.4
million denarii per year, equal to over 125,000 kg of gold! The 
denariuswas a Roman silver coin containing about 4½ gm of pure silver.)
In fact, except for Italy, which was not considered a province inthese centuries, all the territories of the empire were organised intoprovinces and subject to taxation. At its peak in the second century,the Roman Empire stretched from Scotland to the borders ofArmenia, and from the Sahara to the Euphrates and sometimes
beyond. Given that there was no government in the modern sense
to help them to run things, you may well ask, how was it possible
for the emperor to cope with the control and administration of such
a vast and diverse set of territories, with a population of some 60
million in the mid-second century? The answer lies in the
urbanisation of the empire.The great urban centres that lined the shores of the Mediterranean(Carthage, Alexandria, Antioch were the biggest among them) were
the true bedrock of the imperial system. It was through the citiesthat ‚government™ was able to tax the provincial countrysides which

generated much of the wealth of the empire. What this means is
that the local upper classes actively collaborated with the Roman
state in administering their own territories and raising taxes fromthem. In fact, one of the most interesting aspects of Roman political
history is the dramatic shift in power between Italy and the provinces.
Throughout the second and third centuries, it was the provincialupper classes who supplied most of the cadre that governed the

provinces and commanded the armies. They came to form a new
elite of administrators and
military commanders who
became much more powerful

than the senatorial class because
they had the backing of the
emperors. As this new group
emerged, the emperor Gallienus
(253-68) consolidated their rise to
power by excluding senators frommilitary command. We are told

that Gallienus forbade senators
from serving in the army or

having access to it, in order to
prevent control of the empire from
falling into their hands.*These were local
kingdoms that were‚clients™ of Rome.Their rulers couldbe relied on to usetheir forces insupport of Rome,and in return Romeallowed them toexist.The Near EastFrom theperspective ofsomeone who livedin the RomanMediterranean, thisreferred to all theterritory east of theMediterranean,chiefly the Romanprovinces of Syria,Palestine andMesopotamia, andin a looser sensethe surroundingterritories, forexample Arabia.Pont du Gard, nearNimes, France, first
century BCE. Romanengineers builtmassive aqueducts
over three continents
to carry water.

63To sum up, in the late first, second and early third centuries thearmy and administration were increasingly drawn from the provinces,
as citizenship spread to these regions and was no longer confined toItaly. But individuals of Italian origin continued to dominate the senateat least till the third century, when senators of provincial origin became
a majority. These trends reflected the general decline of Italy within
the empire, both political and economic, and the rise of new elites in
the wealthier and more urbanised parts of the Mediterranean, such asthe south of Spain, Africa and the east. A city in the Roman sense was
an urban centre with its own magistrates, city council and a ‚territory™
containing villages which were under its jurisdiction. Thus one city
could not be in the territory of another city, but villages almost always
were. Villages could be upgraded to the status of cities, and vice versa,
usually as a mark of imperial favour (or the opposite). One crucialadvantage of living in a city was simply that it might be better providedfor during food shortages and even famines than the countryside.The Doctor Galen on how Roman CitiesTreated the Countryside
The famine prevalent for many successive years in many provinces has clearlydisplayed for men of any understanding the effect of malnutrition in generating
illness. The city-dwellers, as it was their custom to collect and store enough grainfor the whole of the next year immediately after the harvest, carried off all thewheat, barley, beans and lentils, and left to the peasants various kinds of pulse Œ

after taking quite a large proportion of these to the city. After consuming what was

left in the course of the winter, the country people had to resort to unhealthy foods

in the spring; they ate twigs and shoots of trees and bushes and bulbs and roots ofinedible plants–Œ Galen, On Good and Bad Diet.Public baths were a striking feature ofRoman urban life (when one Iranian rulertried to introduce them into Iran, heencountered the wrath of the clergy there!Water was a sacred element and to use it

for public bathing may have seemed adesecration to them), and urban
populations also enjoyed a much higherlevel of entertainment. For example, one
calendar tells us that spectacula (shows)filled no less than 176 days of the year!Amphitheatre at the Roman cantonment town of Vindonissa(in modern Switzerland), first century 
CE. Used for militarydrill and for staging entertainments for the soldiers.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTSACTIVITY 1 Who were thethree mainplayers in thepolitical historyof the RomanEmpire? Write
one or two linesabout each ofthem. And howdid the Romanemperor manageto govern such a
vast territory?Whosecollaborationwas crucial tothis?
64THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYThe Third-Century Crisis
If the first and second centuries were by and large a period of peace,prosperity and economic expansion, the third century brought the
first major signs of internal strain. From the 230s, the empire found
itself fighting on several fronts simultaneously. In Iran a new andmore aggressive dynasty emerged in 225 (they called themselves the
‚Sasanians™) and within just 15 years were expanding rapidly in thedirection of the Euphrates. In a famous rock inscription cut in threelanguages, Shapur I, the Iranian ruler, claimed he had annihilated a

Roman army of 60,000 and even captured the eastern capital of Antioch.
Meanwhile, a whole series of Germanic tribes or rather tribal
confederacies (most notably, the Alamanni, the Franks and the Goths)
began to move against the Rhine and Danube frontiers, and the wholeperiod from 233 to 280 saw repeated invasions of a whole line ofprovinces that stretched from the Black Sea to the Alps and southern
Germany. The Romans were forced to abandon much of the territory
beyond the Danube, while the emperors of this period were constantlyin the field against what the Romans called ‚barbarians™. The rapid
succession of emperors in the third century (25 emperors in 47 years!)is an obvious symptom of the strains faced by the empire in this period.Gender, Literacy, Culture
One of the more modern features of Roman society was the widespread
prevalence of the nuclear family. Adult sons did not live with theirfamilies, and it was exceptional for adult brothers to share a commonhousehold. On the other hand, slaves were included in the family asthe Romans understood this. By the late Republic (the first centuryBCE), the typical form of marriage was one where the wife did not
transfer to her husband™s authority but retained full rights in theproperty of her natal family. While the woman™s dowry went to thehusband for the duration of the marriage, the woman remained aprimary heir of her father and became an independent property owner
on her father™s death. Thus Roman women enjoyed considerable legalrights in owning and managing property. In other words, in law themarried couple was not one financial entity but two, and the wife
enjoyed complete legal independence. Divorce was relatively easy andneeded no more than a notice of intent to dissolve the marriage byeither husband or wife. On the other hand, whereas males married in
their late twenties or early thirties, women were married off in the late
teens or early twenties, so there was an age gap between husband andwife and this would have encouraged a certain inequality. Marriageswere generally arranged, and there is no doubt that women were oftensubject to domination by their husbands. Augustine*, the great Catholicbishop who spent most of his life in North Africa, tells us that his
mother was regularly beaten by his father and that most other wives*Saint Augustine(354-430) wasbishop of the NorthAfrican city of Hippofrom 396 and atowering figure inthe intellectualhistory of theChurch.Bishops were themost importantreligious figures in aChristiancommunity, andoften very powerful.
65in the small town where he grew up had similar bruises to show!Finally, fathers had substantial legal control over their children Œ
sometimes to a shocking degree, for example, a legal power of life anddeath in exposing unwanted children, by leaving them out in the coldto die.What about literacy? It is certain that rates of casual literacy* variedgreatly between different parts of the empire. For example, in Pompeii,
which was buried in a volcanic eruption in 79 CE, there is strong evidenceof widespread casual literacy. Walls on the main streets of Pompeii
often carried advertisements, and graffiti were found all over the city.
By contrast, in Egypt where hundreds of papyri survive, most formal
documents such as contracts were usually written by professionalscribes, and they often tell us that X or Y is unable to read and write.
But even here literacy was certainly more widespread among certain
categories such as soldiers, army officers and estate managers.
The cultural diversity of the empire was reflected in many ways andat many levels: in the vast diversity of religious cults and local deities;the plurality of languages that were spoken; the styles of dress and
costume, the food people ate, their forms of social

organisation (tribal/non-tribal), even their patterns

of settlement. Aramaic was the dominant languagegroup of the Near East (at least west of the Euphrates),Coptic was spoken in Egypt, Punic and Berber in
North Africa, Celtic in Spain and the northwest. But
many of these linguistic cultures were purely oral, at
least until a script was invented for them. Armenian,

for example, only began to be written as late as the
fifth century, whereas there was already a Coptic*The use of readingand writing ineveryday, oftentrivial, contexts.One of thefunniest of thesegraffiti found onthe walls ofPompeii says:‚Wall, I admire
you for notcollapsing inruinsWhen you haveto support somuch boringwriting on you.™Mosaic in Edessa,
second century CE.The Syriac
inscriptionsuggests thatthose depicted are
the wife of king
Abgar and her
family.Pompeii : a wine-merchant™s dining-
room, its walls
decorated with
scenes depicting
mythical animals.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTS
66THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYtranslation of the Bible by the middle of the third century. Elsewhere,the spread of Latin displaced the written form of languages that were

otherwise widespread; this happened notably with Celtic, which ceasedto be written after the first century.Economic ExpansionThe empire had a substantial economic infrastructure of harbours,mines, quarries, brickyards, olive oil factories, etc. Wheat, wine and
olive-oil were traded and consumed in huge quantities, and they camemainly from Spain, the Gallic provinces, North Africa, Egypt and, to alesser extent, Italy, where conditions were best for these crops. Liquids
like wine and olive oil were transported in containers called ‚amphorae™.
The fragments and sherds of a very large number of these survive
(Monte Testaccio in Rome is said to contain the remnants of over 50million vessels!), and it has been possible for archaeologists to
reconstruct the precise shapes of these containers, tell us what theycarried, and say exactly where they were made by examining the claycontent and matching the finds with clay pits throughout the
Mediterranean. In this way we can now say with some confidence that
Spanish olive oil, to take just one example, was a vast commercialenterprise that reached its
peak in the years 140-160.
The Spanish olive oil of this
period was mainly carried in a
container called ‚Dressel 20™
(after the archaeologist who
first established its form). If

finds of Dressel 20 are widely
scattered across sites in the
Mediterranean, this suggests
that Spanish olive oil
circulated very widely indeed.
By using such evidence (theremains of amphorae of
different kinds and their

‚distribution maps™),
archaeologists are able to
show that Spanish producers
succeeded in capturing
markets for olive oil from their
Italian counterparts. This
would only have happened if
Spanish producers supplied a
better quality oil at lower
prices. In other words, the big
landowners from different
ACTIVITY 2Howindependentwere women inthe Romanworld? Comparethe situation ofthe Romanfamily with thefamily in Indiatoday.Shipwreck off thesouth coast of France,
first century BCE. Theamphorae are Italian,
bearing the stamp of aproducer near theLake of Fondi.
67regions competed with each other for control of the main markets forthe goods they produced. The success of the Spanish olive growerswas then repeated by North African producers Œ olive estates in thispart of the empire dominated production through most of the thirdand fourth centuries. Later, after 425, North African dominance was

broken by the East: in the later fifth and sixth centuries the Aegean,
southern Asia Minor (Turkey), Syria and Palestine became major

exporters of wine and olive oil, and containers from Africa show adramatically reduced presence on Mediterranean markets. Behind these
broad movements the prosperity of individual regions rose and fell
depending on how effectively they could organise the production and

transport of particular goods, and on the quality of those goods.The empire included many regions that had a reputation forexceptional fertility. Campania in Italy, Sicily, the Fayum in Egypt,Galilee, Byzacium (Tunisia), southern Gaul (called Gallia Narbonensis),
and Baetica (southern Spain) were all among the most densely settled

or wealthiest parts of the empire, according to writers like Strabo and
Pliny. The best kinds of wine came from Campania. Sicily and Byzacium
exported large quantities of wheat to Rome. Galilee was densely
cultivated (‚every inch of the soil has been cultivated by the inhabitants™,
wrote the historian Josephus), and Spanish olive oil came mainly from
numerous estates (fundi) along the banks of the river Guadalquivir inthe south of Spain.On the other hand, large expanses of Roman territory were in amuch less advanced state. For example, transhumance* was widespread
in the countryside of Numidia (modern Algeria). These pastoral and

semi-nomadic communities were often on the move, carrying theiroven-shaped huts (called mapalia) with them. As Roman estatesexpanded in North Africa, the pastures of those communities were
drastically reduced and their movements more tightly regulated. Even
in Spain the north was much less developed, and inhabited largely by
a Celtic-speaking peasantry that lived in hilltop villages called castella.When we think of the Roman Empire, we should never forget these
differences.
We should also be careful not to imagine that because this was the
‚ancient™ world, their forms of cultural and economic life were necessarily

backward or primitive. On the contrary, diversified applications of water
power around the Mediterranean as well as advances in water-powered

milling technology, the use of hydraulic mining techniques in the
Spanish gold and silver mines and the gigantic industrial scale on
which those mines were worked in the first and second centuries (with
levels of output that would not be reached again till the nineteenth
century, some 1,700 years later!), the existence of well-organised
commercial and banking networks, and the widespread use of money
are 
all indications of how much we tend to under-estimate thesophistication of the Roman economy. This raises the issue of labour
and of the use of slavery.*Transhumance is
the herdsman™sregular annualmovement betweenthe higher mountainregions and low-lying ground insearch of pasturefor sheep and otherflocks.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTSACTIVITY 3Archaeologistswho work on theremains ofpottery are a bitlike detectives.Can you explainwhy? Also, whatcan amphoraetell us aboutthe economiclife of theMediterraneanin the Romanperiod?
68THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYControlling Workers
Slavery was an institution deeply rooted in the ancient world, both inthe Mediterranean and in the Near East, and not even Christianity
when it emerged and triumphed as the state religion (in the fourthcentury) seriously challenged this institution. It doesnot follow that the bulk of the labour in the Roman
economy was performed by slaves. That may have

been true of large parts of Italy in the Republican
period (under Augustus there were still 3 millionslaves in a total Italian population of 7.5 million) but
it was no longer true of the empire as a whole. Slaves
were an investment, and at least one Roman
agricultural writer advised landowners against using
them in contexts where too many might be required
(for example, for harvests) or where their health couldbe damaged (for example, by malaria). Theseconsiderations were not based on any sympathy for
the slaves but on hard economic calculation. On the
other hand, if the Roman upper classes were often
brutal towards their slaves, ordinary people did
sometimes show much more compassion. See what
one historian says about a famous incident that
occurred in the reign of Nero.As warfare became less widespread with the
establishment of peace in the first century, the supply
of slaves tended to decline and the users of slave
labour thus had to turn either to slave breeding* or

to cheaper substitutes such as wage labour whichwas more easily dispensable. In fact, free labour was
extensively used on public works at Rome precisely
because an extensive use of slave labour would have
been too expensive. Unlike hired workers, slaves hadto be fed and maintained throughout the year, which increased the

cost of holding this kind of labour. This is probably why slaves are not

widely found in the agriculture of the later period, at least not in the
eastern provinces. On the other hand, they and freedmen, that is,

slaves who had been set free by their masters, were extensively usedas business managers, where, obviously, they were not required in
large numbers. Masters often gave their slaves or freedmen capital to
run businesses on their behalf or even businesses of their own.The Roman agricultural writers paid a great deal of attention to themanagement of labour. Columella, a first-century writer who came

from the south of Spain, recommended that landowners should keep
a reserve stock of implements and tools, twice as many as they needed,
so that production could be continuous, ‚for the loss in slave labour-

time exceeds the cost of such items™. There was a general presumption*The practice ofencouraging femaleslaves and theirpartners to havemore children, whowould of course alsobe slaves.Opp page: Mosaic atCherchel, Algeria,early third century CE,with agriculturalscenes.Above: Ploughing andsowing.
Below: Working in

vineyards.On the Treatment of Slaves
‚Soon afterwards the City Prefect,Lucius Pedanius Secundus, was
murdered by one of his slaves. Afterthe murder, ancient custom
required that every slave residing
under the same roof must be
executed. But a crowd gathered,
eager to save so many innocentlives; and rioting began. The
senate-house was besieged. Inside,
there was feeling against excessive
severity, but the majority opposed

any change (–.) [The senators]
favouring execution prevailed.However, great crowds ready with
stones and torches prevented the
order from being carried out. Nero
rebuked the population by edict,
and lined with troops the whole
route along which those
condemned were taken forexecution.™Œ Tacitus (55-117), historian of the
early empire.
69among employers that withoutsupervision no work would ever get
done, so supervision was paramount,for both free workers and slaves. Tomake supervision easier, workers

were sometimes grouped into gangs
or smaller teams. Columella
recommended squads of ten,claiming it was easier to tell who was
putting in effort and who was not in

work groups of this size. This shows
a detailed consideration of the
management of labour. Pliny the

Elder, the author of a very famous
‚Natural History™, condemned the useof slave gangs as the worst method
of organising production, mainly
because slaves who worked in gangs
were usually chained together by
their feet.All this looks draconian*, but weshould remember that most factories
in the world today enforce similar
principles of labour control. Indeed,
some industrial establishments in
the empire enforced even tighter
controls. The Elder Pliny describedconditions in the frankincense**
factories (officinae) of Alexandria, where, he tells us, no amount ofsupervision seemed to suffice. ‚A seal is put upon the workmen™s aprons,

they have to wear a mask or a net with a close mesh on their heads,
and before they are allowed to leave the premises, they have to take off

all their clothes.™ Agricultural labour must have been fatiguing and
disliked, for a famous edict of the early third century refers to Egyptian
peasants deserting their villages ‚in order not to engage in agricultural
work™. The same was probably true of most factories and workshops.
A law of 398 referred to workers being branded so they could be
recognised if and when they run away and try to hide. Many private
employers cast their agreements with workers in the form of debt

contracts to be able to claim that their employees were in debt to them
and thus ensure tighter control over them. An early, second-century
writer tells us, ‚Thousands surrender themselves to work in servitude,
although they are free.™ In other words, a lot of the poorer families wentinto debt bondage in order to survive. From one of the recently
discovered letters of Augustine we learn that parents sometimes sold

their children into servitude for periods of 25 years. Augustine asked
a lawyer friend of his whether these children could be liberated once*Draconian: harsh(so-called because ofan early sixth-century BCEGreek lawmakercalled Draco, whoprescribed death asthe penalty for mostcrimes!).**Frankincense Œ theEuropean name foran aromatic resinused in incense andperfumes. It istapped fromBoswellia trees byslashing the barkand allowing theexuded resins toharden. The best-quality frankincensecame from theArabian peninsula.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTS
70THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYthe father died. Rural indebtedness was even more widespread; to takejust one example, in the great Jewish revolt of 66 CE* the revolutionariesdestroyed the moneylenders™ bonds to win popular support.Again, we should be careful not to conclude that the bulk of labourwas coerced in these ways. The late-fifth-century emperor Anastasiusbuilt the eastern frontier city of Dara in less than three weeks by

attracting labour from all over the East by offering high wages. From

the papyri we can even form some estimate of how widespread wage

labour had become in parts of the Mediterranean by the sixth century,especially in the East.Social HierarchiesLet us stand back from the details now and try and get a sense of thesocial structures of the empire. Tacitus described the leading social
groups of the early empire as follows: senators (patres, lit. ‚fathers™);leading members of the equestrian class; the respectable section of thepeople, those attached to the great houses; the unkempt lower class
(plebs sordida) who, he tells us, were addicted to the circus andtheatrical displays; and finally the slaves. In the early third century
when the Senate numbered roughly 1,000, approximately half of allsenators still came from Italian families. By the late empire, whichstarts with the reign of Constantine I in the early part of the fourth
century, the first two groups mentioned by Tacitus (the senators and
the equites*) had merged into a unified and expanded aristocracy, andat least half of all families were of African or eastern origin. This ‚late

Roman™ aristocracy was enormously wealthy but in many ways less
powerful than the purely military elites who came almost entirely from
non-aristocratic backgrounds. The ‚middle™ class now consisted of the
considerable mass of persons connected with imperial service in the
bureaucracy and army but also the more prosperous merchants and

farmers of whom there were many in the eastern provinces. Tacitus

described this ‚respectable™ middle class as clients of the great senatorial
houses. Now it was chiefly government service and dependence on the

State that sustained many of these families. Below them were the vast
mass of the lower classes known collectively as humiliores (lit. ‚lower™).They comprised a rural labour force of which many were permanently

employed on the large estates; workers in industrial and mining
establishments; migrant workers who supplied much of the labour for
the grain and olive harvests and for the building industry; self-employedartisans who, it was said, were better fed than wage labourers; a large
mass of casual labourers, especially in the big cities; and of course the
many thousands of slaves that were still found all over the western

empire in particular.
One writer of the early fifth century, the historian Olympiodoruswho was also an ambassador, tells us that the aristocracy based in the

City of Rome drew annual incomes of up to 4,000 lbs of gold from their *A rebellion inJudaea againstRoman domination,which wasruthlesslysuppressed bythe Romans inwhat is called the‚Jewish war™.*The equites,(‚knights™ or‚horsemen™) weretraditionally thesecond mostpowerful andwealthy group.Originally, theywere families whoseproperty qualifiedthem to serve in thecavalry, hence thename. Likesenators, most‚knights™ werelandowners, butunlike senatorsmany of them wereshipowners, tradersand bankers, thatis, involved inbusiness activities.ACTIVITY 4The text hasreferred to threewriters whosework is used tosay somethingabout how theRomans treatedtheir workers.Can you identifythem? Rereadthe section foryourself anddescribe any twomethods theRomans used tocontrol labour.

71estates, not counting the produce they consumed directly!The monetary system of the late empire broke with thesilver-based currencies of the first three centuries because
the Spanish silver mines were exhausted and government
ran out of sufficient stocks of the metal to support a stable

coinage in silver. Constantine founded the new monetary

system on gold and there were vast amounts of this in
circulation throughout late antiquity.The late Roman bureaucracy, both the higher and middleechelons, was a comparatively affluent group because it
drew the bulk of its salary in gold and invested much of
this in buying up assets like land. There was of course also
a great deal of corruption, especially in the judicial system
and in the administration of military supplies. The extortionof the higher bureaucracy and the greed of the provincialgovernors were proverbial. But government intervened

repeatedly to curb these forms of corruption Œ we only

know about them in the first place because of the laws that
tried to put an end to them, and because historians and
other members of the intelligentsia denounced such
practices. This element of ‚criticism™ is a remarkable feature
of the classical world. The Roman state was an authoritarian
regime; in other words, dissent was rarely tolerated and
government usually responded to protest with violence

(especially in the cities of the East where people were often
fearless in making fun of emperors). Yet a strong tradition

of Roman law had emerged by the fourth century, and thisacted as a brake on even the most fearsome emperors.
Emperors were not free to do whatever they liked, and thelaw was actively used to protect civil rights. That is why in
the later fourth century it was possible for powerful bishops like

Ambrose to confront equally powerful emperors when they were

excessively harsh or repressive in their handling of the civilian
population.Late AntiquityWe shall conclude this chapter by looking at the cultural transformation
of the Roman world in its final centuries. ‚Late antiquity™ is the term

now used to describe the final, fascinating period in the evolution andbreak-up of the Roman Empire and refers broadly to the fourth toseventh centuries. The fourth century itself was one of considerable
ferment, both cultural and economic. At the cultural level, the period

saw momentous developments in religious life, with the emperor
Constantine deciding to make Christianity the official religion, and
with the rise of Islam in the seventh century. But there were equally
important changes in the structure of the state that began with theAN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTSIncomes of the RomanAristocracy,
Early Fifth Century‚Each of the great houses ofRome contained within
itself everything which amedium-sized city couldhold, a hippodrome, fora,
temples, fountains and
different kinds of baths–
Many of the Romanhouseholds received an
income of four thousand
pounds of gold per year from
their properties, not
including grain, wine and
other produce which, if sold,would have amounted toone-third of the income in
gold. The income of the
households at Rome of the
second class was one
thousand or fifteen hundred
pounds of gold.™Œ Olympiodorus of Thebes.
72THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYemperor Diocletian (284-305), and it may be best to start with these.Overexpansion had led Diocletian to ‚cut back™ by abandoningterritories with little strategic or economic value. Diocletian also fortifiedthe frontiers, reorganised provincial boundaries, and separated civilianfrom military functions, granting greater autonomy to the military
commanders (duces), who now became a more powerful group.
Constantine consolidated some of these changes and added others of
his own. His chief innovations were in the monetary sphere, where heintroduced a new denomination, the solidus, a coin of 4½ gm of puregold that would in fact outlast the Roman Empire itself. Solidi wereminted on a very large scale and their circulation ran into millions. Theother area of innovation was the creation of a second
capital at Constantinople (at the site of modern

Istanbul in Turkey, and previously calledByzantium), surrounded on three sides by the sea.As the new capital required a new senate, the fourth
century was a period of rapid expansion of the
governing classes. Monetary stability and an

expanding population stimulated economic growth,
and the archaeological record shows considerable
investment in rural establishments, including
industrial installations like oil presses and glass
factories, in newer technologies such as screw
presses and multiple water-mills, and in a revival

of the long-distance trade with the East.All of this carried over into strong urbanprosperity that was marked by new forms of
architecture and an exaggerated sense of luxury.
The ruling elites were wealthier and more powerful

than ever before. In Egypt, hundreds of papyri
survive from these later centuries and they show
us a relatively affluent society where money was in

extensive use and rural estates generated vast
incomes in gold. For example, Egypt contributed
taxes of over 2½ million solidi a year (roughly 35,000lbs of gold) in the reign of Justinian in the sixthcentury. Indeed, large parts of the Near Eastern countryside were

more developed and densely settled in the fifth and sixth centuriesthan they would be even in the twentieth century! This is the social
background against which we should set the cultural developments of
this period.The traditional religious culture of the classical world, both Greekand Roman, had been polytheist. That is, it involved a multiplicity of
cults that included both Roman/Italian gods like Jupiter, Juno, Minerva

and Mars, as well as numerous Greek and eastern deities worshipped

in thousands of temples, shrines and sanctuaries throughout the
empire. Polytheists had no common name or label to describePart of a colossalstatue of Emperor
Constantine, 313 CE.
73themselves. The other great religious tradition in the empire wasJudaism. But Judaism was not a monolith* either, and there was a

great deal of diversity within the Jewish communities of late antiquity.Thus, the ‚Christianisation™** of the empire in the fourth and fifthcenturies was a gradual and complex process. Polytheism did not
disappear overnight, especially in the western provinces, where the

Christian bishops waged a running battle against beliefs and practices
they condemned more than the Christian laity*** did. The boundariesbetween religious communities were much more fluid in the fourthcentury than they would become thanks to the repeated efforts of

religious leaders, the powerful bishops who now led the Church, to

rein in their followers and enforce a more rigid set of beliefs and practices.The general prosperity was especially marked in the East wherepopulation was still expanding till the sixth century, despite the impact ofthe plague which affected the Mediterranean in the 540s. In the West, by
contrast, the empire fragmented politically as Germanic groups from the

North (Goths, Vandals, Lombards, etc.) took over all the major provinces

and established kingdoms that are best described as ‚post-Roman™. The
most important of these were that of the Visigoths in Spain, destroyed by
the Arabs between 711 and 720, that of the Franks in Gaul (c.511-687)
and that of the Lombards in Italy (568-774). These kingdoms foreshadowed
the beginnings of a different kind of world that is usually called ‚medieval™.

In the East, where the empire remained united, the reign of Justinian is
the highwater mark of prosperity and imperial ambition. Justinian*monolith Œ literallya large block ofstone, but theexpression is usedto refer to anything(for example asociety or culture)that lacks varietyand is all of thesame type.**Christianisation Œthe process bywhich Christianityspread amongdifferent groups ofthe population andbecame thedominant religion.The Colosseum, built in79 CE, where gladiatorsfought wild beasts. Itcould accommodate60,000 people.AN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTS***laity Œthe ordinarymembers of areligious communityas opposed to thepriests or clergywho have officialpositions within thecommunity.
74THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYrecaptured Africa from the Vandals (in 533) but his recovery of Italy (from
the Ostrogoths) left that country devastated and paved the way for the
Lombard invasion. By the early seventh century, the war between Romeand Iran had flared up again, and the Sasanians who had ruled Iran sincethe third century launched a wholesale invasion of all the major eastern

provinces (including Egypt). When Byzantium, as the Roman Empire was
now increasingly known, recovered these provinces in the 620s, it was
just a few years away, literally, from the final major blow which came, thistime, from the south-east.The expansion of Islam from its beginnings in Arabia has beencalled ‚the greatest political revolution ever to occur in the history of
the ancient world™. By 642, barely ten years after Prophet Muhammad™s
death, large parts of both the eastern Roman and Sasanian empires
had fallen to the Arabs in a series of stunning confrontations. However,
we should bear in mind that those conquests, which eventually (acentury later) extended as far afield as Spain, Sind and Central Asia,
began in fact with the subjection of the Arab tribes by the emerging
Islamic state, first within Arabia and then in the Syrian desert and on
the fringes of Iraq. As we will see in Theme 4, the unification of the
Arabian peninsula and its numerous tribes was the key factor behind
the territorial expansion of Islam.MAP 2: West Asia

75EVENTS27 BCE‚Principate™ founded by Octavian; now calls himself Augustusc. 24-79Life of the Elder Pliny; dies in the volcanic eruption of Vesuvius,
which also buries the Roman town of Pompeii66-70The great Jewish revolt and capture of Jerusalem by Roman forcesc. 115Greatest extent of the Roman Empire, following Trajan™s conquests
in the East212All free inhabitants of the empire transformed into Roman citizens
224New dynasty founded in Iran, called ‚Sasanians™ after ancestor Sasan
250sPersians invade Roman territories west of the Euphrates258Cyprian bishop of Carthage executed
260sGallienus reorganises the army273Caravan city of Palmyra destroyed by Romans

297Diocletian reorganises empire into c.100 provinces

c. 310Constantine issues new gold coinage (the ‚solidus™)
312Constantine converts to Christianity
324Constantine now sole ruler of empire; founds city of Constantinople

354-430Life of Augustine, bishop of Hippo378Goths inflict crushing defeat on Roman armies at Adrianople

391Destruction of the Serapeum (temple of Serapis) at Alexandria

410Sack of Rome by the Visigoths

428Vandals capture Africa
434-53Empire of Attila the Hun493Ostrogoths establish kingdom in Italy
533-50Recovery of Africa and Italy by Justinian541-70Outbreaks of bubonic plague568Lombards invade Italy

c.570Birth of Muhammad614-19Persian ruler Khusro II invades and occupies eastern Roman territories622Muhammad and companions leave Mecca for Medina

633-42First and crucial phase of the Arab conquests; Muslim armiestake Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Iraq and parts of Iran661-750Umayyad dynasty in Syria698Arabs capture Carthage
711Arab invasion of Spain
RULERS27 BCE-14 CEAugustus, firstRoman emperor
14-37Tiberius98-117Trajan
117-38
Hadrian193-211Septimius Severus241-72reign of Shapur I
in Iran253-68Gallienus284-305the ‚Tetrarchy™;

Diocletian main
ruler312-37Constantine
309-79 reign of
Shapur II in Iran408-50Theodosius II
(compiler of the
famous
‚Theodosian Code™)490-518Anastasius527-65Justinian
531-79 reign of
Khusro I in Iran610-41HeracliusAN EMPIRE ACROSS THREE CONTINENTS
76THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYExercisesANSWER IN BRIEF1.If you had lived in the Roman Empire, where would you rather
have lived Œ in the towns or in the countryside? Explain why.
2.Compile a list of some of the towns, cities, rivers, seas and
provinces mentioned in this chapter, and then try and find them
on the maps. Can you say something about any three of the items
in the list you have compiled?3.Imagine that you are a Roman housewife preparing a shopping
list for household requirements. What would be on the list?4.Why do you think the Roman government stopped coining in
silver? And which metal did it begin to use for the production ofcoinage?ANSWER IN A SHORT
 ESSAY
5.Suppose the emperor Trajan had actually managed to conquer
India and the Romans had held on to the country for severalcenturies. In what ways do you think India might be differenttoday?6.Go through the chapter carefully and pick out some basic features
of Roman society and economy which you think make it lookquite modern.Mosaic at Ravenna,547 CE, showingEmperor Justinian.
77The Central
 Islamic
LandsAS we enter the twenty-first century, there are over 1 billion
Muslims living in all parts of the world. They are citizens
of different nations, speak different languages, and dressdifferently. The processes by which they became Muslimswere varied, and so were the circumstances in which they
went their separate ways. Yet, the Islamic community has its

roots in a more unified past which unfolded roughly 1,400
years ago in the Arabian peninsula. In this chapter we aregoing to read about the rise of Islam and its expansion over a
vast territory extending from Egypt to Afghanistan, the core
area of Islamic civilisation from 600 to 1200. In these
centuries, Islamic society exhibited multiple political and
cultural patterns. The term Islamic is used here not only in

its purely religious sense but also for the overall society andculture historically associated with Islam. In this society noteverything that was happening originated directly from
religion, but it took place in a society where Muslims and
their faith were recognised as socially dominant. Non-Muslims
always formed an integral, if subordinate, part of this society

as did Jews in Christendom.Our understanding of the history of the central Islamic landsbetween 600 and 1200 is based on chronicles or tawarikh(which narrate events in order of time) and semi-historicalworks, such as biographies (sira), records of the sayings anddoings of the Prophet (hadith) and commentaries on theQuran (tafsir). The material from which these works wereproduced was a large collection of eyewitness reports (akhbar)transmitted over a period of time either orally or on paper.
The authenticity of each report (khabar) was tested by acritical method which traced the chain of transmission (isnad)and established the reliability of the narrator. Although the

method was not foolproof, medieval Muslim writers were more
careful in selecting their information and understanding the

motives of their informants than were their contemporaries
in other parts of the world. On controversial issues, theyreproduced different versions of the same event, as they foundin their sources, leaving the task of judgement to theirreaders. Their description of events closer to their own times
is more systematic and analytical and less of a collection of
akhbar. Most of the chronicles and semi-historical works are
THEME4
78THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYin Arabic, the best being the Tarikh of Tabari (d. 923) whichhas been translated into English in 38 volumes. Persianchronicles are few but they are quite detailed in their treatmentof Iran and Central Asia. Christian chronicles, written inSyriac (a dialect of Aramaic*), are fewer but they throw
interesting light on the history of early Islam. Besides
chronicles, we have legal texts, geographies, travelogues andliterary works, such as stories and poems.Documentary evidence (fragmentary pieces of writing,such as official orders or private correspondence) is themost valuable for writing histories because it does not
consciously refer to events and persons. It comes almost
entirely from Greek and Arabic papyri (good for
administrative history) and the Geniza records. Someevidence has emerged from archaeological (excavationsdone at desert palaces), numismatic (study of coins) andepigraphic (study of inscriptions) sources which is of great
value for economic history, art history, and for establishing
names and dates.Proper histories of Islam began to be written in thenineteenth century by university professors in Germany and
the Netherlands. Colonial interests in the Middle East andNorth Africa encouraged French and British researchers to

study Islam as well. Christian priests too paid close attention
to the history of Islam and produced some good work,
although their interest was mainly to compare Islam with
Christianity. These scholars, called Orientalists, are knownfor their knowledge of Arabic and Persian and criticalanalysis of original texts. Ignaz Goldziher was a Hungarian
Jew who studied at the Islamic college (al-Azhar) in Cairo
and produced path-breaking studies in German of Islamic

law and theology. Twentieth-century historians of Islam have
largely followed the interests and methods of Orientalists.They have widened the scope of Islamic history by includingnew topics, and by using allied disciplines, such as
economics, anthropology and statistics, have refined many
aspects of Orientalist studies. The historiography of Islam
is a good example of how religion can be studied with
modern historical methods by those who may not share the
customs and beliefs of the people they are studying.The Rise of Islam in Arabia:Faith, Community and PoliticsDuring 612-32, the Prophet Muhammad preached the worship of asingle God, Allah, and the membership of a single community of believers
(umma). This was the origin of Islam. Muhammad was an Arab bylanguage and culture and a merchant by profession. Sixth-centuryArab culture was largely confined to the Arabian peninsula and areasof southern Syria and Mesopotamia.
*Aramaic is alanguage related toHebrew and Arabic.It has also beenused in Ashokaninscriptions.
79The Arabs were divided into tribes* (qabila), each led by a chief whowas chosen partly on the basis of his family connections but more forhis personal courage, wisdom and generosity (murawwa). Each tribehad its own god or goddess, who was worshipped as an idol (sanam) ina shrine (masjid). Many Arab tribes were nomadic (Bedouins), movingfrom dry to green areas (oases) of the desert in search of food (mainlydates) and fodder for their camels. Some settled in cities and practised
trade or agriculture. Muhammad™s own tribe, Quraysh, lived in Meccaand controlled the main shrine there, a cube-like structure called Kaba,
in which idols were placed. Even tribes outside Mecca considered the
Kaba holy and installed their own idols at this shrine, making annual
pilgrimages (hajj) to the shrine. Mecca was located on the crossroadsof a trade route between Yemen and Syria which further enhanced the

city™s importance (see Map p. 82). The Meccan shrine was a sanctuary(haram) where violence was forbidden and protection given to all visitors.Pilgrimage and commerce gave the nomadic and settled tribesopportunities to communicate with one another and share their beliefs
and customs. Although the polytheistic Arabs were vaguely familiar
with the notion of a Supreme God, Allah (possibly under the influence
of the Jewish and Christian tribes living in their midst), their attachment
to idols and shrines was more immediate and stronger.
Around 612, Muhammad declared himself to be the messenger(rasul) of God who had been commanded to preach that Allah aloneshould be worshipped. The worship involved simple rituals, such as
daily prayers (salat), and moral principles, such as distributing almsand abstaining from theft. Muhammad was to found a community
of believers (umma) bound by a common set of religious beliefs. Thecommunity would bear witness (shahada) to the existence of thereligion before God as well as before members of other religiouscommunities. Muhammad™s message particularly appealed to those
Meccans who felt deprived of the gains from trade and religion and
were looking for a new community identity. Those who
accepted the doctrine were called Muslims. 
Theywere promi
sed salvation on the Day of Judgement(qiyama) and a share of the resources of thecommunity while on earth. The Muslims soon
faced considerable opposition from affluent

Meccans who took offence to the rejection of

their deities and found the new religion a
threat to the status and prosperity of Mecca.
In 622, Muhammad was forced
to migrate with his followers to Medina.
Muhammad™s journey from Mecca (
hijra) wasa turning point in the history of

Islam, with the year of his arrival in
Medina marking the beginning of the
Muslim calendar.
*Tribes are societies
organised on the basisof blood relationships.The Arab tribes weremade up of clans orcombinations of largefamilies. Unrelated
clans also merged to
make a tribe stronger.
Non-Arab individuals(mawali) becamemembers through thepatronage of prominenttribesmen. Even afterconverting to Islam, themawali were nevertreated as equals bythe Arab Muslims andhad to pray in separatemosques.THE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDSMedival painting ofArchangel Gabriel
(Jibril) who broughtmessages toMuhammad. The first
word he spoke was
‚recite™ (iqra) fromwhich has come theword Quran. In Islamic
cosmology, angels are
one of the three
intelligent forms of life

in the Universe. The
other two are humansand jinns.
80THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYIslamic CalendarThe Hijri era was established during the caliphate of Umar, with the first year
falling in 622 CE. A date in the Hijri calendar is followed by the letters AH.The Hijri year is a lunar year of 354 days, 12 months (Muharram to DhulHijja) of 29 or 30 days. Each day begins at sunset and each month with thesighting of the crescent moon. The Hijri year is about 11 days shorter than thesolar year. Therefore, none of the Islamic religious festivals, including the

Ramazan fast, Id and hajj, corresponds in any way to seasons. There is no easyway to match the dates in the Hijri calendar with the dates in the Gregorian
calendar (established by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582 CE). One can calculate therough equivalents between the Islamic (H) and Gregorian Christian (C) yearswith the following formulae:(H × 32 / 33) + 622 = C(C Œ 622) × 33 / 32 = HThe survival of a religion rests on the survivalof the community of believers. The communityhas to be consolidated internally and protected
from external dangers. Consolidation and
protection require political institutions such
as states and governments which are either

inherited from the past, borrowed from outside
or created from scratch. In Medina,
Muhammad created a political order from all
three sources which gave his followers the
protection they needed as well as resolved the
city™s ongoing civil strife. The umma wasconverted into a wider community to include
polytheists and the Jews of Medina under the
political leadership of Muhammad.
Muhammad consolidated the faith for his
followers by adding and refining rituals (such
as fasting) and ethical principles. The
community survived on agriculture and trade,
as well as an alms tax (zakat). In addition, theMuslims organised expeditionary raids (ghazw)on Meccan caravans and nearby oases. Theseraids provoked reactions from the Meccans and
caused a breach with the Jews of Medina. AfterPilgrims at the Kaba, illustration from a fifteenth-century Persian manuscript. A pilgrim (haji)touches the black stone (hajr al-aswad) whileangels (malaika) watch.
81a series of battles, Mecca was conquered and Muhammad™s reputationas a religious preacher and political leader spread far and wide.
Muhammad now insisted on conversion as the sole criterion formembership of the community. In the harsh conditions of the desert,the Arabs attached great value to strength and solidarity. Impressed by
Muhammad™s achievements, many tribes, mostly Bedouins, joined the
community by converting to Islam. Muhammad™s alliances began to
spread until they embraced the whole of Arabia. Medina became theadministrative capital of the emerging Islamic state with Mecca as its
religious centre. The Kaba was cleansed of idols as Muslims were required
to face the shrine when offering prayers. In a short space of time,

Muhammad was able to unite a large part of Arabia under a new faith,
community and state. The early Islamic polity, however, remained a

federation of Arab tribes and clans for a long time.The Caliphate: Expansion, Civil Wars and
Sect FormationAfter Muhammad™s death in 632, no one could legitimately claim to be
the next prophet of Islam. As a result, his political authority was
transferred to the umma with no established principle of succession.This created opportunities for innovations but also caused deep divisionsamong the Muslims. The biggest innovation was the creation of the
institution of caliphate, in which the leader of the community (amir al-muminin) became the deputy (khalifa) of the Prophet. The first fourcaliphs (632-61) justified their powers on the basis of their closeassociation with the Prophet and continued his work under the general
guidelines he had provided. The twin objectives of the caliphate were to
retain control over the tribes constituting the umma and to raiseresources for the state.Following Muhammad™s death, many tribes broke away from theIslamic state. Some even raised their own prophets to establishcommunities modelled on the umma. The first caliph, Abu Bakr,
suppressed the revolts by a series of campaigns. The second caliph,Umar, shaped the 
umma™s policy of expansion of power. The caliph
knew that the umma could not be maintained out of the modestincome derived from trade and taxes. Realising that rich booty
(ghanima) could be obtained from expeditionary raids, the caliph andhis military commanders mustered their tribal strength to conquer
lands belonging to the Byzantine Empire in the west and the Sasanian
empire in the east. At the height of their power, the Byzantine and

Sasanian empires ruled vast territories and commanded huge

resources to pursue their political and commercial interests in Arabia.
The Byzantine Empire promoted Christianity and the Sasanian empire

patronised Zoroastrianism, the ancient religion of Iran. On the eve ofthe Arab invasions, these two empires had declined in strength due
to religious conflicts and revolts by the aristocracy. This made itTHE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDS
82THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYeasier for the Arabs to annex territories through wars and treaties. Inthree successful campaigns (637-642), the Arabs brought Syria, Iraq,
Iran and Egypt under the control of Medina. Military strategy, religiousfervour and the weakness of the opposition contributed to the successof the Arabs. Further campaigns were launched by the third caliph,
Uthman, to extend the control to Central Asia. Within a decade of the

death of Muhammad, the Arab-Islamic state controlled the vast
territory between the Nile and the Oxus. These lands remain underMuslim rule to this day.In all the conquered provinces, the caliphs imposed a newadministrative structure headed by governors (
amirs) and tribalchieftains (ashraf 
). The central treasury (bait al-mal) obtained itsrevenue from taxes paid by Muslims as well as its share of the booty
from raids. The caliph™s soldiers, mostly Bedouins, settled in campcities at the edge of the desert, such as Kufa and Basra, to remainwithin reach of their natural habitat as well as the caliph™s command.
The ruling class and soldiers received shares of the booty and monthly
payments (ata). The non-Muslim population retained their rights toproperty and religious practices on payment of taxes (kharaj and jiziya).Jews and Christians were declared protected subjects of the state
(dhimmis) and given a large measure of autonomy in the conduct oftheir communal affairs.
MAP 1: The IslamicLandsExpansion of Islam under MuhammadCentral Islamic lands c. 750
83Political expansion and unification did not come easily to the Arabtribesmen. With territorial expansion, the unity of the umma becamethreatened by conflicts over the distribution of resources and offices.
The ruling class of the early Islamic state comprised almost entirelythe Quraysh of Mecca. The third caliph, Uthman (644-56), also a
Quraysh, packed his administration with his own men to secure greater
control. This further intensified the Meccan character of the state and
the conflict with the other tribesmen. Opposition in Iraq and Egypt,combined with opposition in Medina, led to the assassination of
Uthman. With Uthman™s death, Ali became the fourth caliph.The rifts among the Muslims deepened after Ali (656-61) fought twowars against those who represented the Meccan aristocracy. Ali™s
supporters and enemies later came to form the two main sects of

Islam: Shias and Sunnis. Ali established himself at Kufa and defeatedan army led by Muhammad™s wife, Aisha, in the Battle of the Camel
(657). He was, however, not able to suppress the faction led by Muawiya,

a kinsman of Uthman and the governor of Syria. Ali™s second battle, at

Siffin (northern Mesopotamia), ended in a truce which split his followers

into two groups: some remained loyal to him, while others left the
camp and came to be known as Kharjis. Soon after, Ali was assassinated

by a Kharji in a mosque at Kufa. After his death, his followers paid
allegiance to his son, Hussain, and his descendants. Muawiya made
himself the next caliph in 661, founding the Umayyad dynasty which
lasted till 750.After the civil wars, it appeared as if Arab domination woulddisintegrate. There were also signs that the tribal conquerors were
adopting the sophisticated culture of their subjects. It was under theUmayyads, a prosperous clan of the Quraysh tribe, that a second
round of consolidation took place.The Umayyads and the Centralisation of PolityThe conquest of large territories destroyed the caliphate based in Medinaand replaced it with an increasingly authoritarian polity. The Umayyads
implemented a series of political measures which consolidated theirleadership within the umma. The first Umayyad caliph, Muawiya, movedhis capital to Damascus and adopted the court ceremonies andadministrative institutions of the Byzantine Empire. He also introduced
hereditary succession and persuaded the leading Muslims to accept
his son as his heir. These innovations were adopted by the caliphs who
followed him, and allowed the Umayyads to retain power for 90 years
and the Abbasids, for two centuries.The Umayyad state was now an imperial power, no longer based
directly on Islam but on statecraft and the loyalty of Syrian troops.
There were Christian advisers in the administration, as well as
Zoroastrian scribes and bureaucrats. However, Islam continued to
provide legitimacy to their rule. The Umayyads always appealed forTHE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDS
84THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYunity and suppressed rebellionsin the name of Islam. They also
retained their Arab socialidentity. During the reign of Abdal-Malik (685-705) and his
successors, both the Arab and
Islamic identities were strongly
emphasised. Among themeasures Abd al-Malik took were
the adoption of Arabic as the
language of administration and
the introduction of an Islamic
coinage. The gold dinar andsilver dirham that had beencirculating in the caliphate were
copies of Byzantine and Iraniancoins (denarius and drachm), with symbols of crosses and fire altarsand Greek and Pahlavi (the language of Iran) inscriptions. These symbols
were removed and the coins now carried Arabic inscriptions. Abd al-
Malik also made a highly visible contribution to the development of an
Arab-Islamic identity, by building the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem.Abd al-Malik™s Coinage Reform
The three coin specimens show the transition from Byzantine toArab-Islamic coinage. On the second coin, the bearded and long-
haired caliph is dressed in traditional Arab robes and is holding asword. It is the first extant portrait of a Muslim. It is also uniquebecause later there developed an antipathy towards the
representation of living beings in art and craft. Abd al-Malik™s reform
of coinage was linked with his reorganisation of state finances. Itproved so successful that for hundreds of years, coins were struckaccording to the pattern and weight of the third specimen.Byzantine gold solidus(denarius aureus) showingthe emperor Heraclius andhis two sons.Portrait gold dinar struckby Abd al-Malik with hisname and image.The reformed dinar was purely epigraphic.

It carries the kalima: ‚There is no God butAllah and He has no partner (sharik)™The Dome of the Rock,built over a rocky
mound by Abd al-Malik, is the earliestmajor work of Islamic
architecture. Created
as a monument to the
Muslim presence inthe city of Jerusalem,
it acquired a mystical
association connected
with the Night Journey

of the Prophet to
Heaven (miraj).
85The Abbasid RevolutionFor their success in centralising the Muslim polity, the Umayyadspaid a heavy price. A well-organised movement, called dawa, broughtdown the Umayyads and replaced them with another family ofMeccan origin, the Abbasids, in 750. The Abbasids portrayed theUmayyad regime as evil and promised a restoration of the original
Islam of the Prophet. The revolution led not only to a change of
dynasty but changes in the political structure and culture of Islam.The Abbasid uprising broke out in the distant region of Khurasan(eastern Iran), a 20-day journey from Damascus on a fast horse.
Khurasan had a mixed Arab-Iranian population which could be
mobilised for various reasons. The Arab soldiers here were mostly
from Iraq and resented the dominance of the Syrians. The civilian
Arabs of Khurasan disliked the Umayyad regime for having made
promises of tax concessions and privileges which werenever fulfilled. As for the Iranian Muslims (mawali), theywere exposed to the scorn of the race-conscious
Arabs and were eager to join any campaign to oust
the Umayyads.The Abbasids, descendants of Abbas, the Prophet™suncle, mustered the support of the various dissident
groups and legitimised their bid for power by promising
that a messiah (mahdi) from the family of the Prophet(ahl al-bayt) would liberate them from the oppressiveUmayyad regime. Their army was led by an Iranian

slave, Abu Muslim, who defeated the last Umayyad
caliph, Marwan, in a battle at the river Zab.Under Abbasid rule, Arab influence declined,while the importance of Iranian culture increased.The Abbasids established their capital at Baghdad,
near the ruins of the ancient Iranian metropolis,
Ctesiphon. The army and bureaucracy were

reorganised on a non-tribal basis to ensure
greater participation by Iraq and Khurasan. The
Abbasid rulers strengthened the religious
status and functions of the caliphate and
patronised Islamic institutions and
scholars. But they were forced by the
needs of government and empire to

retain the centralised nature of the
state. They maintained the magnificent
imperial architecture and elaborate
court ceremonials of the Umayyads.
The regime which took pride in having
brought down the monarchy found
itself compelled to establish it again.THE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDSThe Great Mosque ofal-Mutawwakil in
Samarra (the secondAbbasid capital) builtin 850. The minar is
50 metres high, and is
made  of brick.
Inspired byMesopotamian
architectural
traditions, this was
the largest mosque in
the world for
centuries.
86THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYBreak-up of the Caliphate and the Rise ofSultanatesThe Abbasid state became weaker from the ninth century because
Baghdad™s control over the distant provinces declined, and because of
conflict between pro-Arab and pro-Iranian factions in the army and
bureaucracy. In 810, a civil war broke out between supporters of Aminand Mamun, sons of the caliph Harun al-Rashid, which deepened the
factionalism and created a new power bloc of Turkish slave officers

(mamluk). Shiism once again competed with Sunni orthodoxy for power.
A number of minor dynasties arose, such as the Tahirids and Samanidsin Khurasan and Transoxiana (Turan or lands beyond the Oxus), and

the Tulunids in Egypt and Syria. Abbasid power was soon limited to
central Iraq and western Iran. That too was lost in 945 when the

Buyids, a Shiite clan from the Caspian region of Iran (Daylam), captured
Baghdad. The Buyid rulers assumed various titles, including the ancient
Iranian title shahanshah (king of kings), but not that of caliph. Theykept the Abbasid caliph as the symbolic head of their Sunni subjects.The decision not to abolish the caliphate was a shrewd one, becauseanother Shiite dynasty, the Fatimids, had ambitions to rule the Islamic
world. The Fatimids belonged to the Ismaili sub-sect of Shiism and
claimed to be descended from the Prophet™s daughter, Fatima, and

hence, the sole rightful rulers of Islam. From their base in North Africa,
they conquered Egypt in 969 and established the Fatimid caliphate.
The old capital of Egypt, Fustat, was replaced by a new city, Qahira
(Cairo), founded on the day of the rise of the planet Mars (Mirrikh, alsocalled al-Qahir). The two rival dynasties patronised Shiite administrators,poets and scholars.Between 950 and 1200, Islamic society was held together not by asingle political order or a single language of culture (Arabic) but bycommon economic and cultural patterns. Unity in the face of political

divisions was maintained by the separation between state and society,
the development of Persian as a language of Islamic high culture, and
the maturity of the dialogue between intellectual traditions. Scholars,
artists and merchants moved freely within the central Islamic lands
and assured the circulation of ideas and manners. Some of these also
percolated down to the level of villages due to conversion. The Muslim
population, less than 10 per cent in the Umayyad and early Abbasid
periods, increased enormously. The identity of Islam as a religion and

a cultural system separate from other religions became much sharper,

which made conversion possible and meaningful.A third ethnic group was added to the Arabs and Iranians, with therise of the Turkish sultanates in the tenth and eleventh centuries. The
Turks were nomadic tribes from the Central Asian steppes (grasslands)
of Turkistan (north-east of the Aral Sea up to the borders of China)
who gradually converted to Islam (see Theme 5). They were skilled
riders and warriors and entered the Abbasid, Samanid and BuyidACTIVITY 1Identify thechanginglocations of thecaliphate™scapital. Whichwould you saywas mostcentrallysituated?
87administrations as slaves and soldiers, rising to high positions onaccount of their loyalty and military abilities. The Ghaznavid sultanate
was established by Alptegin (961) and consolidated by Mahmud ofGhazni (998-1030). Like the Buyids, the Ghaznavids were a military
dynasty with a professional army of Turks and Indians (one of the

generals of Mahmud was an Indian named Tilak). But their centre of

power was in Khurasan and Afghanistan and for them, the Abbasid
caliphs were not rivals but a source of legitimacy. Mahmud wasconscious of being the son of a slave and was especially eager to receive
the title of Sultan from the caliph. The caliph was willing to support
the Sunni Ghaznavid as a counterweight to Shiite power.
The Saljuq Turks entered Turan as soldiers in the armies of the
Samanids and Qarakhanids (non-Muslim Turks from further east).
They later established themselves as a powerful group under the
leadership of two brothers, Tughril and Chaghri Beg. Takingadvantage of the chaos following the death of Mahmud of Ghazni,
the Saljuqs conquered Khurasan in 1037 and made Nishapur* their
first capital. The Saljuqs next turned their attention to western

Persia and Iraq (ruled by the Buyids) and in 1055, restored Baghdad
to Sunni rule. The caliph, al-Qaim, conferred on Tughril Beg the
title of Sultan in a move that marked the separation of religious and
political authority. The two Saljuq brothers ruled together in
accordance with the tribal notion of rule by the family as a whole.
Tughril (d. 1064) was succeeded by his nephew, Alp Arsalan.
During Alp Arsalan™s reign, the Saljuq empire expanded to Anatolia
(modern Turkey).
From the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries, there was a series ofconflicts between European Christians and the Arab states. This isdiscussed below. Then, at the start of the thirteenth century, the
Muslim world found itself on the verge of a great disaster. This was the

threat from the Mongols, the last but most decisive of all nomadic
assaults on settled civilisations (see Theme 5).The CrusadesIn medieval Islamic societies, Christians were regarded as the People ofthe Book (ahl al-kitab) since they had their own scripture (the NewTestament or Injil). Christians were granted safe conduct (aman) whileventuring into Muslim states as merchants, pilgrims, ambassadorsand travellers. These territories also included those which were once
held by the Byzantine Empire, notably the Holy Land of Palestine.
Jerusalem was conquered by the Arabs in 638 but it was ever-present

in the Christian imagination as the place of Jesus™ crucifixion andresurrection. This was an important factor in the formation of the

image of Muslims in Christian Europe.Hostility towards the Muslim world became more pronounced inthe eleventh century. Normans, Hungarians and some Slavs had
*An important Perso-Islamic centre oflearning and the
birthplace of UmarKhayyam.THE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDS
88THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYbeen converted to Christianity, and the Muslims alone remained as
the main enemy. There was also a change in the social and economic
organisation of western Europe in the eleventh century which
contributed to the hostility between Christ
endom and the Islamicworld. The clergy and the warrior class (the first two orders Œ seeTheme 6) were making efforts to ensure political stability as well as

economic growth based on agriculture and trade. The possibilities
of military confrontation between competing feudal principalitiesand a return to economic organisation based on plunder were

contained by the Peace of God movement. All military violence was
forbidden inside certain areas, near places of worship, during certainperiods considered sacred in
the Church™s calendar, and

against certain vulnerablesocial groups, such aschurchmen and the common
people. The Peace of God
deflected the aggressive
tendencies of feudal society
away from the Christian world
and towards the ‚enemies™ of
God. It built a climate in which
fighting against the infidels
(non-believers) became not
only permissible but also

commendable.The death in 1092 of MalikShah, the Saljuq sultan ofBaghdad, was followed by the
disintegration of his empire.
This offered the Byzantine

emperor, Alexius I, a chance

to regain Asia Minor and
northern Syria. For Pope

Urban II, this was an
opportunity to revive the spirit
of Christianity. In 1095, the
Pope joined the Byzantine
emperor in calling for a war in
the name of God to liberate the
Holy Land. Between 1095 and
1291, western European

Christians planned and foughtAleppo, a Hittite,Assyrian and
Hellenistic site, whichwas occupied by theArabs in 636. It was
fought over for the
next 1,000 years; note
the Crusaders seen inaction.
ŒNasuh al-Matraki™s
Itinerary, 1534-36.
89wars against Muslim cities on the coastal plains of the eastern
Mediterranean (Levant). These wars were later designated as
Crusades*.In the first crusade (1098-99), soldiers from France and Italycaptured Antioch in Syria, and claimed Jerusalem. Their victory
was accompanied by the slaughter of Muslims and Jews in the city,
chronicled by both Christians and Muslims. Muslim writers referred
to the arrival of the Christians (called ifrinji or firangi) as a Frankishinvasion. The Franks quickly established four crusader states inthe region of Syria-Palestine. Collectively, these territories were

known as Outremer (the land overseas) and later crusades were
directed at its defence and expansion.The Outremer survived well for some time, but when the Turkscaptured Edessa in 1144, an appeal was made by the Pope for asecond crusade (1145-49). A combi
ned German 
and French army
made an attempt to capture Damascus but they were defeated andforced to return home. After this, there was a gradual erosion of the

strength of Outremer. Crusader zeal gave way to living in luxury

and to battles over territory among the Christian rulers. Salah al-

Din (Saladin) created an Egypto-Syrian empire and gave the call for
jihad or holy war against the Christians, and defeated them in 1187.He regained Jerusalem, nearly a century after the first crusade.
Records of the time indicate that Salah al-Din™s treatment of the
Christian population was humane, in marked contrast to the way in
which Christians had earlier dealt with Muslims and Jews. Although
he gave custody of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to the
Christians, a number of churches were turned into mosques, and
Jerusalem once again became a Muslim city.The loss of the city prompted a third crusade in 1189, but thecrusaders gained little except for some coastal towns in Palestine
and free access to Jerusalem for Christian pilgrims. The Mamluks,
the rulers of Egypt, finally drove the crusading Christians from all
of Palestine in 1291. Europe gradually lost military interest in Islam
and focused on its internal political and cultural development.
The Crusades left a lasting impact on two aspects of Christian-Muslim relations. One was the harsher attitude of the Muslim state
towards its Christian subjects which resulted from the bitter
memories of the conflict as well as the needs for security in areas of
mixed populations. The other was the greater influence of Italian

mercantile communities (from Pisa, Genoa and Venice) in the trade

between the East and the West even after the restoration of

Muslim power.
*The Pope ordered the
ceremonial granting ofcrosses to those whohad sworn to fight.
THE CENTRAL ISLAMIC LANDS
90THEMES IN WORLD HISTORYFranks in SyriaThe treatment of the subjugated Muslim population differed among the various Frankishlords. The earliest of the crusaders, who settled down in Syria and Palestine, were generally
more tolerant of the Muslim population than those who came later. In his memoirs,
Usama ibn Munqidh, a twelfth-century Syrian Muslim, has something interesting to sayabout his new neighbours:‚Among the Franks there are some who have settled down in this country and associated
with Muslims. These are better than the newcomers, but they are exceptions to the
rule, and no inference can be drawn from them.Here is an example. Once I sent a man to Antioch on business. At that time,Chief Theodore Sophianos [aneastern Christian] was there, and
he and I were friends. He was then
all powerful in Antioch. One day
he said to my man, ‚‚One of my
Frankish friends has invited me.Come with me and see how they
live.™™ My man told me: ﬁSo I went

with him, and we came to the
house of one of the old knights,
those who had come with the first
Frankish expedition. He had
already retired from state and
military service, and had a
property in Antioch from which he
lived. He produced a fine table,
with food both tasty and cleanly
served. He saw that I was reluctantto eat, and said: ﬁEat to your heart™s

content, for I do not eat Frankishfood. I have Egyptian women cooks and eat nothing but what they prepare, nor
does swine flesh ever enter my house.ﬂ So I ate, but with some caution, and we took
our leave.Later I was walking through the market, when suddenly a Frankish woman caughthold of me and began jabbering in their language, and I could not understand what
she was saying. A crowd of Franks collected against me, and I was sure that my end
had come. Then, suddenly, that same knight appeared and saw me, and came up to

that woman, and asked her: ﬁWhat do you want of this Muslim?ﬂ She replied: ﬁHe
killed my brother Hurso.ﬂ This Hurso was a knight of Afamiya who had been killed
by someone from the army of Hama. Then the knight shouted at her and said, ﬁThis
man is a burjasi [bourgeois, that is, a merchant]. He does not fight or go to war.ﬂ And
he shouted at the crowd and they dispersed; then he took my hand and went away.

So the effect of that meal that I had was to save me from death.ﬂ ™Œ Kitab al-Itibar.A Crusader castle in Syria. Built during thecrusades (1110), it was an important base to
attack Arab controlled areas. The towers andaqueducts were built by the Mamluk sultan,Baybars, when he captured  it in 1271.
