A mathematician knows how to solve a problem,he can not solve it. Œ MILNE 3.1  Introduction
The word ‚trigonometry™ is derived from the Greek words‚trigon™ and ‚
metron
™ and it means ‚measuring the sides of
a triangle™. The subject was originally developed to solve
geometric problems involving triangles. It was studied by
sea captains for navigation, surveyor to map out the new
lands, by engineers and others. Currently, trigonometry is

used in many areas such as the science of seismology,

designing electric circuits, describing the state of an atom,
predicting the heights of tides in the ocean, analysing a
musical tone and in many other areas.In earlier classes, we have studied the trigonometricratios of acute angles as the ratio of the sides of a right
angled triangle. We have also studied the trigonometric identities and application of

trigonometric ratios in solving the problems related to heights and distances. In this
Chapter, we will generalise the concept of trigonometric ratios to trigonometric functions

and study their properties.3.2  Angles
Angle is a measure of rotation of a given ray about its initial point. The original ray isChapter3TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONSArya Bhatt (476-550)Fig  3.1
Vertex

50MATHEMATICS
called the initial side and the final position of the ray after rotation is called the
terminal side of the angle. The point of rotation is called the 
vertex. If the direction ofrotation is anticlockwise, the angle is said to be positive and if the direction of rotation
is clockwise, then the angle is negative (Fig 3.1).The measure of an angle is the amount ofrotation performed to get the terminal side from
the initial side. There are several units for
measuring angles. The definition of an angle
suggests a unit, viz. one complete revolution
 from the position of the initial side as
indicated in Fig 3.2.This is often convenient for large angles. For example, we can say that a rapidlyspinning wheel is making an angle of say 15 revolution per second. We shall  describe

two other units of measurement of an angle which are most commonly used, viz.
degree measure and radian measure.3.2.1  Degree measure 
 If a rotation from the initial side to terminal side is 
th1360ofa revolution, the angle is said to have a measure of one degree
, written as 1°.  A degree is
divided into 60 minutes, and a minute is divided into 60 seconds . One sixtieth of a degree is
called a minute, written as 1, and one sixtieth of a minute is called a second, written as 1.Thus,1° = 60
1 = 60
Some of the angles whose measures are 360°,180°, 270°, 420°, Œ 30°, Œ 420° areshown in Fig 3.3.Fig  3.2
Fig  3.3

TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS     513.2.2  Radian measure  There is another unit for measurement of an angle, called
the radian measure. Angle subtended at the centre by an arc of length 1 unit in a
unit circle (circle of radius 1 unit) is said to have a measure of 1 radian. In the Fig
3.4(i) to (iv), OA is the initial side and OB is the terminal side. The figures show theangles whose measures are 1 radian, Œ1 radian, 112 radian and Œ1
12 radian.
(i)(ii)(iii)Fig  3.4 (i) to (iv)
(iv)We know that the circumference of a circle of radius
 1 unit is 2. Thus, one
complete revolution of the initial side subtends an angle of  2
 radian.
More generally, in a circle of radius
 r, an arc of length r will subtend an angle of
1 radian. It is well-known that equal arcs of a circle subtend equal angle at the centre.
Since in a circle of radius r, an arc of length r subtends an angle whose measure is 1radian, an arc of length l will subtend an angle whose measure is lr radian. Thus, if in
a circle of radius r, an arc of length l subtends an angle  radian at the centre, we have
  = 
lr  or  
l  = 
r 
52MATHEMATICS
3.2.3  Relation between radian and real numbers
Consider the unit circle with centre O. Let A be any point
on the circle. Consider OA as initial side of an angle.
Then the length  of an arc of the circle will give the radian

measure of the angle which the arc will subtend at the
centre of the circle. Consider the line PAQ which is

tangent to the circle at A. Let the point A represent the

real number zero, AP represents positive real number and

AQ represents negative real numbers (Fig 3.5). If we
rope the line AP in the anticlockwise direction along the

circle, and AQ in the clockwise direction, then every real

number will correspond to a radian measure and
conversely. Thus, radian measures and real numbers can

be considered as one and the same.
3.2.4   Relation between degree and radian
   Since a circle subtends at the centre
an angle whose radian measure is 2 and its degree measure is 360°, it follows that
2 radian = 360°  or
 radian = 180°
The above relation enables us to express a radian measure in terms of degree
measure and a degree measure in terms of radian measure. Using approximate value
of  as 
227, we have1 radian = 
180
= 57° 16
 approximately.
Also1° = 
180
 radian  =  0.01746 radian approximately.
The relation between degree measures and radian measure of some common anglesare given in the following table:
AO1P12−1−−2−Q0Fig  3.5
Degree30°45°60°90°
180°270°360°
Radian6432322
