Every body of discovery is mathematical in form because there is noother guidance we can have Œ DARWIN
7.1  Introduction
Suppose you have a suitcase with a number lock. The number

lock has 4 wheels each labelled with 10 digits from 0 to 9.The lock can be opened if 4 specific digits are arranged in a
particular sequence with no repetition. Some how, you have

forgotten this specific sequence of digits. You remember only
the first digit which is 7. In order to open  the lock, how many
sequences of 3-digits you may have to check with? To answer

this question, you may, immediately, start listing all possible
arrangements of  9 remaining digits taken 3 at a time. But,
this method will be tedious, because the number of possible
sequences may be large. Here, in this Chapter, we shall learn
some basic counting techniques which will enable us to answer this question withoutactually listing 3-digit arrangements. In fact, these techniques will be useful in determining
the number of different ways of arranging and selecting objects without actually listingthem. As a first step, we shall examine a principle which is most fundamental to thelearning of these techniques.7.2  Fundamental Principle of Counting
Let us 
consider the following problem. Mohan has 3 pants and 2 shirts. How manydifferent pairs of a pant and a shirt, can he dress up with? There are 3 ways in which
a pant can be chosen, because there are 3 pants available. Similarly, a shirt can be
chosen in 2 ways. For every choice of a pant, there are 2 choices of a shirt. Therefore,there are 3 × 2 = 6 pairs of a pant and a shirt.7ChapterPERMUTATIONS 
AND COMBINATIONSJacob Bernoulli(1654-1705)
   PERMUTATIONS 
AND COMBINATIONS       135
Let us name the three pants as P1, P2, P3  and the two shirts as S
1, S2. Then,these six possibilities can be illustrated in the Fig. 7.1.Let us consider another problemof the same type.
Sabnam has 2 school bags, 3 tiffin boxes
and 2 water bottles. In how many ways
can she carry these items (choosing one
each).A school  bag can be chosen in 2
different ways. After a school bag is

chosen, a tiffin box can be chosen in 3
different ways. Hence, there are
2 × 3 = 6 pairs of school bag and a tiffin
box. For each of these pairs a water
bottle can be chosen in 2 different ways.
Hence, there are 6 × 2 = 12 different ways in which, Sabnam can carry these items to
school. If we name the 2 school bags as B1, B2, the three tiffin boxes as T1, T2, T3 and
the two water bottles as W1, W2, these possibilities can be illustrated in the Fig. 7.2.Fig 7.1Fig 7.2
136       MA
THEMATICSIn fact, the problems of the above types are solved by applying the followingprinciple known as the fundamental principle of counting, or, simply, the 
multiplicationprinciple, which states thatﬁIf an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event
can occur in n different ways, then the total number of occurrence of the events

in the given order is m×n.ﬂ
The above principle can be generalised for any finite number of events. Forexample, for 3 events, the principle is as follows:‚If an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event canoccur in n different ways, following which a third event can occur in p different ways,then the total number of occurrence to ‚the events in the given order is m × n × p.ﬂIn the first problem, the required number of ways of wearing a pant and a shirtwas the number of different ways of the occurence of the following events in succession:
(i)the event of choosing a pant
(ii)the event of choosing a shirt.In the second problem, the required number of ways was the number of differentways of the occurence of the following events in succession:(i)the event of choosing a school bag
(ii)the event of choosing a tiffin box(iii)the event of choosing a water bottle.Here, in both the cases, the events in each problem could occur in various possibleorders. But, we have to choose any one of the possible orders and count the number ofdifferent ways of the occurence of the events in this chosen order.
Example 1 Find the number of 4 letter words, with or without meaning, which can beformed out of the letters of the word ROSE, where the repetition of the letters is not
allowed.Solution There are as many words as there are ways of filling in 4 vacant placesby the 4 letters, keeping in mind that the repetition is not allowed. Thefirst place can be filled in 4 different ways by anyone of the 4 letters R,O,S,E. Followingwhich, the second place can be filled in by anyone of the remaining 3 letters in 3different ways, following which the third place can be filled in 2 different ways; followingwhich, the fourth place can be filled in 1 way. Thus, the number of ways in which the
4 places can be filled, by the multiplication principle, is 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24. Hence, therequired number of words is 24.
