CHAPTER EIGHTGRAVITATION
8.1 INTRODUCTIONEarly in our lives, we become aware of the tendency of all
material objects to be attracted towards the earth.  Anything
thrown up falls down towards the earth, going uphill is lot
more tiring than going downhill, raindrops from the clouds

above fall towards the earth and  there are many other such
phenomena.  Historically it was the Italian Physicist Galileo
(1564-1642) who recognised the fact that all bodies,
irrespective of their masses, are accelerated towards the earth
with a constant acceleration.  It is said  that he made a public
demonstration of this fact.  To find the truth, he certainly did

experiments with bodies rolling down inclined planes and
arrived at a value of the acceleration due to gravity which isclose to the more accurate value obtained later.
A seemingly unrelated phenomenon, observation of stars,planets and their motion has been the subject of attention inmany countries since the earliest of times.  Observations since

early times recognised stars which appeared in the sky with
positions unchanged year after year.  The more interesting
objects are the planets which seem to have regular motions

against the background of stars.  The earliest recorded model
for planetary motions proposed by Ptolemy about 2000 years
ago was a ‚geocentric™ model in which all celestial objects,
stars, the sun and the planets, all revolved around the earth.
The only motion that was thought to be possible for celestialobjects was motion in a circle.  Complicated schemes of motion

were put forward by Ptolemy in order to describe the observed
motion of the planets.  The planets were described as moving
in circles with the center of the circles themselves moving in

larger circles.  Similar theories were also advanced by Indian
astronomers some 400 years later.  However a more elegant
model in which the Sun was the center around which the

planets revolved Œ the ‚heliocentric™ model Œ was already
mentioned by Aryabhatta (5th century A.D.) in his treatise. A
thousand years later, a Polish monk named Nicolas
8.1Introduction
8.2Kepler™s laws

8.3Universal law of
gravitation8.4The gravitational
constant8.5Acceleration due to
gravity of the earth8.6Acceleration due to
gravity below and above
the surface of earth
8.7Gravitational potential
energy
8.8Escape speed
8.9Earth satellites

8.10Energy 
of an orbitingsatellite8.11Geo
stationary and polarsatellites8.12Weightlessness
SummaryPoints to ponderExercises
Additional exercises

184PHYSICSBACPSS'2b2aCopernicus (1473-1543) proposed a definitive
model in which the planets moved in circles

around a fixed central sun.  His theory was

discredited by the church, but notable amongst

its supporters was Galileo who had to face
prosecution from the state for his beliefs.
It was around the same time as Galileo, a
nobleman called Tycho Brahe (1546-1601)
hailing from Denmark, spent his entire lifetime

recording observations of the planets with the

naked eye.  His compiled data were analysed

later by his assistant Johannes Kepler (1571-
1640). He could extract from the data three

elegant laws that now go by the name of Kepler™s

laws.  These laws were known to Newton and

enabled him to make a great scientific leap in

proposing his universal law of gravitation.
8.2  KEPLER™S LAWS
The three laws of Kepler can be stated as follows:1.  Law of orbits :
 All planets move in elliptical
orbits with the Sun situated at one of the  foci
Fig. 8.1(a)An ellipse traced out by a planet around

the sun. The closest point is P and the
farthest point is A, P is called the
perihelion and A the aphelion. The

semimajor axis is half the distance AP.
Fig. 8.1(b)Drawing an ellipse. A string has its ends
fixed at F1 and F
2. The tip of a pencil holdsthe string taut and is moved around.
of the ellipse (Fig. 8.1a). This law was a  deviation
from the Copernican model which allowed only

circular orbits. The ellipse, of which the circle is
a special case, is a closed curve which can bedrawn very simply as follows.Select two points F1 and F
2.  Take a length
of a string and  fix its ends at F
1 and F
2 by pins.
With the tip of a pencil  stretch the string taut

and then draw a curve by moving the pencilkeeping the string taut throughout.(Fig. 8.1(b))
The closed curve you get is called an ellipse.
Clearly for any point T on the ellipse, the sum ofthe distances from F
1 and F2 is a constant.  F1,F2 are called the focii. Join the points F
1 and  F2and extend   the line to intersect the ellipse atpoints P and A as shown in Fig. 8.1(b). The
midpoint of the line PA is the centre of the ellipse

O and the length PO = AO  is called the semi-
major axis of the ellipse. For a circle, the two
focii  merge into one  and the semi-major axis

becomes the radius of the circle.
2. Law of areas :
 The line that joins any planet
to the sun sweeps  equal areas in equal intervals

of time (Fig. 8.2).  This law comes from the
observations that planets appear to move slowerwhen they are  farther from the sun than when

they are nearer.
Fig. 8.2The planet P moves around the sun in an
elliptical orbit. The shaded area is the area
A swept out in a small interval of time  t.3. Law of periods : The square of the time period
of revolution of a planet is proportional to the
cube of the semi-major axis of the ellipse tracedout by  the planet.The table below gives the approximate time
periods of revolution of nine planets around the
sun along with values of their semi-major axes.
GRAVITATION
185Table 1
Data from measurement of planetary
motions given below confirm Kepler™s

Law of PeriodsaSemi-major  axis in units of  10
10 m.
TTime period of revolution of the planet
in years(y).QThe quotient ( T2/a3  ) in units of
10 -34 y2 m-3.PlanetaTQ
Mercury5.790.242.95
Venus10.80.6153.00

Earth15.012.96

Mars22.81.882.98

Jupiter77.8
11.93.01
Saturn14329.52.98

Uranus287842.98

Neptune4501652.99
Pluto5902482.99
The law of areas can be understood as aconsequence of  conservation of angular

momentum whch is valid for any central force .

A central force is such that  the force on the

planet is along the vector joining the sun and
the planet. Let the sun be at the origin and let
the position and momentum of the planet bedenoted by r and 
p  respectively. Then the area
swept out by the planet of mass m in time

interval t is (Fig. 8.2) A given byA = ½  (r × vt)(8.1)
 Hence
A/t    =½ (r × p)/m, (since  v = p/m)                      =    L / (2 m)(8.2)
where 
v is the velocity,  
L is the angular
momentum equal  to   ( r  ×  
p  ).  For a central
force, which is directed along 
r, L is  a constant
as the planet goes around. Hence,  
A/t is a
constant according to the last equation. This is
the law of areas. Gravitation is a central force

and hence the law of areas follows.
Example 8.1  Let  the speed of the planet
at  the  perihelion 
P in Fig. 8.1(a) be 
vP  and
the Sun-planet distance SP be rP. Relate{rP, vP} to the corresponding quantities at
the aphelion {rA, vA}. Will the planet take
equal times to traverse BAC and CPB ?Answer  The magnitude of the angular
momentum at P is 
Lp =  m
p rp vp, since inspectiontells us that rp and 
vp are mutually
perpendicular. Similarly, 
LA = m
p rA vA. From
angular momentum conservationmp rp vp = mp rA vAorvvpA=rrApSince rA   
> rp, vp > 
vA .The area 
SBAC bounded by the ellipse andthe radius vectors SB and SC is larger than SBPCin Fig. 8.1. From Kepler™s second law, equal areas
are swept in equal times. Hence the planet will

take a longer time to traverse BAC than CPB.8.3  UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION
Legend has it that observing an apple fallingfrom a tree, Newton was inspired to arrive at an
universal law of gravitation that led to anexplanation of terrestrial  gravitation as well as

of Kepler™s laws.  Newton™s reasoning was that
the moon revolving in an orbit of radius Rm was
subject to a centripetal acceleration due to
earth™s gravity of magnitude2224mmmRVaRT==(8.3)where 
V is the speed of the moon related to the
time period T  by the relation 
2/mVRT
=. Thetime period T is about 27.3 days and 
Rm was
already known then to be about 3.84 × 10
8m.  If
we substitute these numbers in equation (8.3),we get a value of am much smaller than the value
of acceleration due to gravity g on the surface of

the earth, arising also due to earth™s gravitational
attraction.Johannes Kepler(1571Œ1630)  was a
scientist of German

origin. He formulated

the three laws of
planetary motion based

on the painstaking
observations of TychoBrahe and coworkers. Kepler himself was an
assistant to Brahe and it took him sixteen long
years to arrive at the three planetary laws. He
is also known as the founder of geometrical
optics, being the first to describe what happens
to light after it enters a telescope.
186PHYSICSCentral ForcesWe know the time rate of change of the angular momentum of a single particle about the origin
isddt=×lrFThe angular momentum of the particle is conserved, if the torque 
=×rF due to the
force 
F on it vanishes. This happens either when F is zero or when 
F is along 
r. We are
interested in forces which satisfy the latter condition. Central forces satisfy this condition.
A ‚central™ force is always directed towards or away from a fixed point, i.e., along the position
vector of the point of application of the force with respect to the fixed point. (See Figure below.)

Further, the magnitude of a central force 
F depends on r, the distance of the point of applicationof the force from the fixed point; 
F = F(r).In the motion under a central force the angular momentum is always conserved. Two important
results follow from this:
(1)The motion of a particle under the central force is always confined to a plane.
(2)The position vector of the particle with respect to the centre of the force (i.e. the fixed point)
has a constant areal velocity. In other words the position vector sweeps out equal areas in

equal times as the particle moves under the influence of the central force.
Try to prove both these results. You may need to know that the areal velocity is given by :
dA/dt = ½ r v sin .An immediate application of the above discussion can be made to the motion of a planetunder the gravitational force of the sun. For convenience the sun may be taken to be so heavy

that it is at rest. The gravitational force of the sun on the planet is directed towards the sun.

This force also satisfies the requirement 
F = F(r), since F = G m1m2/r2 where 
m1 and 
m2 are
respectively the masses of the planet and the sun and 
G is the universal constant of gravitation.
The two results (1) and (2) described above, therefore, apply to the motion of the planet. In fact,

the result (2) is the well-known second law of Kepler.
Tr is the trejectory of the particle under the central force. At a position P, the force is directed
along OP, O is the centre of the force taken as the origin. In time 
t, the particle moves from 
P to P
,arc PP
 = 
s = v t. The tangent PQ  at P to the trajectory gives the direction of the velocity at P. The
area swept in 
t is the area of sector POP
 ()sinrPP/2 = (r v sin a) 
t/2.)
GRAVITATION
187This clearly shows that the force due to
earth™s gravity decreases with distance.  If one

assumes that the gravitational force due to the

earth decreases in proportion to the inverse

square of the distance from the center of the
earth, we will have 2mmaR−; Œ2EgR and we get
22mmERgaR=; 3600(8.4)
in agreement with a value of 
g ; 9.8  m s
-2 and
the value of a
m from Eq. (8.3).  These
observations led Newton to propose the following

Universal Law of Gravitation :
Every body in the universe attracts every other
body with a force which is directly proportional

to the product of their masses and inversely

proportional to the square of the distance

between them.
The quotation is essentially from Newton™s
famous treatise  called ‚Mathematical Principles

of Natural Philosophy™ (Principia for short).Stated Mathematically, Newton™s gravitationlaw reads : The force 
F on a point mass m2 due
to another point mass m1 has the magnitude
122||mmGr=F(8.5)Equation (8.5) can be expressed in vector form as
$()$1212
22ŒŒmmmm
GGrr==Frr
   $123ŒmmG=rrwhere G is the universal gravitational constant,
$r is the unit vector from 
m1 to 
m2 and 
r = 
r2 Œ 
r1as shown in Fig. 8.3.The  gravitational force is attractive, i.e., the
force 
F is along Œ r. The force on point mass 
m1due to m2 is of course Œ 
F by Newton™s third law.
Thus, the gravitational force 
F12 on the body 1
due to 2 and F21 on the body 2 due to 1 are
related as F12 = Œ F21.Before we can apply Eq. (8.5) to objects under
consideration, we have to be careful since the

law refers to 
point masses whereas we deal with
extended objects which have finite size. . If we
have a collection of point masses,the force on

any one of them is the vector sum of the
gravitational forces exerted by the other point

masses as shown in Fig 8.4.Fig. 8.4Gravitational force on point mass m
1 is the
vector sum of the gravitational forces exerted
by m2, m3 and m
4.The total force on 
m1 is
211221Gmm
r=F$3121231Gmm
r+r $$413141
241Gmm
r+rrExample 8.2  Three equal masses of m kg
each are fixed at the vertices of an

equilateral triangle ABC.
(a) What is the force acting on a mass 2
mplaced at the centroid G of the triangle?

(b) What is the force if the mass at the
vertex A is doubled ?

      Take AG 
= BG 
= CG 
= 1m (see Fig. 8.5)
Fig. 8.3Gravitational force on m1 due to m
2 is along
r where the vector 
r is (
r2Œ r1).O
