CHAPTER TENMECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS10.1 INTRODUCTIONIn this chapter, we shall study  some common physicalproperties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can  flowand are therefore, called  fluids.  It is this property thatdistinguishes liquids and gases from solids in a basic way.Fluids are everywhere around us. Earth has an envelop ofair and two-thirds of its surface is covered with water.  Wateris not only necessary for our existence; every mammalianbody constitute mostly of water. All the  processes occurringin living beings including plants are mediated by fluids. Thusunderstanding the behaviour and properties of fluids isimportant.How are fluids different from solids? What is common inliquids and gases? Unlike  a solid, a fluid has no definite
shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,whereas a gas fills the entire volume of its container. Wehave learnt in the previous chapter that the volume of solidscan be changed by stress. The volume of solid, liquid or gasdepends on the stress or pressure acting on it. When wetalk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pressure. The difference between gasesand solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to  change of external pressure is rather small.In other words solids and liquids have much lowercompressibility as compared to gases.Shear stress can change the shape of a solid keeping itsvolume fixed. The key property of fluids is that they offervery little resistance to shear stress; their shape changes byapplication of very small shear stress. The shearing stressof fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids.10.2  PRESSUREA sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Ourskin, however, remains intact when a blunt object with awider contact area (say the back of a spoon) is pressed againstit with the same force. If an elephant were to step on a man™schest, his ribs would crack. A circus performer across whose10.1Introduction10.2Pressure10.3Streamline flow10.4Bernoulli™s principle10.5Viscosity10.6Reynolds number10.7Surface tensionSummaryPoints to ponder
ExercisesAdditional exercisesAppendix
chest a large, light but strong wooden plank isplaced first, is saved from this accident. Sucheveryday experiences convince us that both theforce and its coverage area are important. Smallerthe area on which the force acts, greater is theimpact. This concept is known  as pressure.When an object is submerged in a fluid atrest, the fluid exerts a force on its surface. Thisforce is always normal to the object™s surface.This is so because if there were a component offorce parallel to the surface, the object will alsoexert a force on the fluid parallel to it; as aconsequence of Newton™s third law. This forcewill cause the fluid to flow parallel to the surface.Since the fluid is at rest, this cannot happen.Hence, the force exerted by the fluid at rest hasto be perpendicular to the surface in contactwith it. This is shown in Fig.10.1(a).The normal force exerted by the fluid at a pointmay be measured. An idealised form of one suchpressure-measuring device is shown in Fig.10.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with
a spring that is calibrated to measure the forceacting on the piston. This device is placed at a
point inside the fluid. The inward force exertedby the fluid on the piston is balanced by the
outward spring force and is thereby measured.If F is the magnitude of this normal force on thepiston of area A then the average pressure Pavis defined as the normal force acting per unitarea.PFAav
=             (10.1)In principle, the piston area can be madearbitrarily small. The pressure is then definedin a limiting sense asP = lim
DA0
®DDFA(10.2)Pressure is a scalar quantity. We remind thereader that it is the component of the forcenormal to the area under consideration and notthe (vector) force that appears in the numeratorin Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2). Its dimensions are[MLŒ1TŒ2]. The SI unit of pressure is N mŒ2. It hasbeen named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the
French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) whocarried out pioneering studies on fluid pressure.A common unit of pressure is the atmosphere(atm), i.e. the pressure exerted by theatmosphere at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 ´ 105 Pa).Another quantity, that is indispensable indescribing fluids, is the density r. For a fluid ofmass m occupying volume V,r=mV(10.3)The dimensions of density are [MLŒ3]. Its SIunit is kg mŒ3. It is a positive scalar quantity. Aliquid is largely incompressible and its densityis therefore, nearly constant at all pressures.Gases, on the other hand exhibit a largevariation in densities with pressure.The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is1.0 ´ 103 kg mŒ3. The relative density of asubstance is the ratio of its density to the
density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionlesspositive scalar quantity. For example the relativedensity of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is2.7 ´ 103 kg mŒ3.  The densities of some commonfluids are displayed in Table 10.1.Table 10.1Densities of some common fluidsat STP*(a)(b)Fig. 10.1(a) The force exerted by the liquid in thebeaker on the submerged object or on thewalls is normal (perpendicular) to thesurface at all points.(b) An idealised device for measuringpressure.*STP means standard temperature (00C) and 1 atm pressure.MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS247
248PHYSICStExample 10.1   The two thigh bones(femurs), each of cross-sectional area10 cm2support the upper part of a human body ofmass 40 kg. Estimate the average pressuresustained by the femurs.Answer   Total cross-sectional area of thefemurs is A = 2 ´ 10 cm2 = 20 ´ 10Œ4 m2. Theforce acting on them is F = 40kg wt = 400 N(taking g = 10 m sŒ2). This force is actingvertically down and hence, normally on thefemurs. Thus, the average pressure is25m N 
10 
 2 
   -´==AFPav
                            t10.2.1 Pascal™s LawThe French scientist Blaise Pascal observed thatthe pressure in a fluid at rest is the same at allpoints if they are at the same height. This factmay be demonstrated in a simple way.Fig. 10.2 shows an element in the interior ofa fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in theform of a right-angled prism. In principle, thisprismatic element is very small so that every
part of it can be considered at the same depthfrom the liquid surface and therefore, the effectof the gravity is the same at all these points.
But for clarity we have enlarged this element.The forces on this element are those exerted bythe rest of the fluid and they must be normal tothe surfaces of the element as discussed above.Thus, the fluid exerts pressures Pa, Pb and Pc onthis element of area corresponding to the normalforces Fa, Fb and Fc as shown in Fig. 10.2 on thefaces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Aband Ac respectively. ThenFb sinq = Fc,Fb cosq = Fa(by equilibrium)Ab sinq = Ac,Ab cosq = Aa(by geometry)Thus,;bca
bca
bca
FFF
PPP
AAA
====
(10.4)Hence, pressure exerted is same in alldirections in a fluid at rest. It again reminds usthat like other types of stress, pressure is not avector quantity. No direction can be assignedto it.  The force against any area within (orbounding) a fluid at rest and under pressure isnormal to the area, regardless of the orientationof the area.Now consider a fluid element in the form of ahorizontal bar of uniform cross-section. The baris in equilibrium. The horizontal forces exertedat its two ends  must be balanced or the
pressure at the two ends should be equal. Thisproves that for a liquid in equilibrium thepressure is same at all points in a horizontalplane. Suppose the pressure were not equal indifferent parts of the fluid, then there would bea flow as the  fluid will have some net forceacting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the
pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere.Wind is flow of air due to pressure differences.10.2.2 Variation of Pressure with DepthConsider a fluid at rest in a container. InFig. 10.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.The pressures at points 1 and 2 are P1 and P2respectively. Consider a cylindrical element offluid having area of base A and height h. As thefluid is at rest the resultant horizontal forcesshould be zero and the resultant vertical forcesshould balance the weight of the element. The
forces acting in the vertical direction are due tothe fluid pressure at the top (P1A) actingdownward, at the bottom (P2A) acting upward.If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder wehave(P2 - P1) A = mg(10.5)Now, if r is the mass density of the fluid, wehave the mass of fluid to be m = rV= rhA sothatP2 - P1=  rgh(10.6)Fig. 10.2Proof of Pascal™s law. ABC-DEF is anelement of the interior of a fluid at rest.This element is in the form of a right-angled prism. The element is small so thatthe effect of gravity can be ignored, but ithas been enlarged for the sake of clarity.
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS249tFig.10.3Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravityis illustrated through pressure on a verticalcylindrical column.Pressure difference depends on the verticaldistance h between the points (1 and 2), massdensity of the fluid r and acceleration due togravity g. If the point 1 under discussion isshifted to the top of the  fluid (say water), whichis open to the atmosphere, P1 may be replacedby atmospheric pressure (Pa) and we replace P2by P. Then Eq. (10.6) givesP = Pa + rgh(10.7)Thus, the pressure P, at depth below thesurface of a liquid open to the atmosphere isgreater than atmospheric pressure by anamount rgh. The excess of pressure, P - Pa, atdepth h is called a gauge pressure at that point.The area of the cylinder is not appearing inthe expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (10.7).Thus, the height of the fluid column is important
and not cross sectional or base area or the shapeof the container. The liquid pressure is the sameat all points at the same horizontal level (same
depth).  The result is appreciated through theexample of hydrostatic paradox. Consider threevessels A, B and C  [Fig.10.4] of different shapes.They are connected at the bottom by a horizontalpipe. On filling with water the level in the threevessels is the same though they hold differentamounts of water. This is so, because water atthe bottom has the same pressure below eachsection of the vessel.Fig 10.4Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. Thethree vessels A, B and C contain differentamounts of liquids, all upto the sameheight.Example 10.2 What is the pressure on aswimmer 10 m below the surface of a lake?Answer Hereh = 10 m and r = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m sŒ2From Eq. (10.7)P = Pa + rgh   = 1.01 ´ 105 Pa + 1000 kg mŒ3 ´ 10 m sŒ2 ´ 10 m   = 2.01 ´ 105 Pa    » 2 atmThis is a 100% increase in pressure fromsurface level. At a depth of 1 km the increase inpressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designedto withstand such enormous pressures.  t10.2.3Atmospheric Pressure and GaugePressureThe pressure of the atmosphere at any point isequal to the weight of a column of air of unit
cross sectional area extending from that pointto the top of the atmosphere. At sea level it is1.013 ´ 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientistEvangelista Torricelli (1608-1647) devised forthe first time, a method for measuring
atmospheric pressure. A long glass tube closedat one end and filled with mercury is invertedinto a trough of mercury as shown in Fig.10.5 (a).This device is known as mercury barometer. Thespace above the mercury column in the tubecontains only mercury vapour whose pressureP is so small  that it may be neglected. Thepressure inside the column at point A mustequal the pressure at point B, which is at thesame level. Pressure at B = atmosphericpressure = PaPa = rgh(10.8)where r is the density of mercury and h is theheight of the mercury column in the tube.
250PHYSICSttIn the experiment it is found that the mercurycolumn in the barometer has a height of about76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere(1 atm). This can also be obtained using thevalue of r in Eq. (10.8). A common way of statingpressure is in terms of cm or mm of mercury(Hg). A pressure equivalent of 1 mm is called atorr (after Torricelli).1 torr = 133 Pa.
The mm of Hg and torr are used in medicineand physiology. In meteorology, a common unitis the bar and millibar.1 bar = 105 PaAn open-tube manometer is a usefulinstrument for measuring pressure differences.It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable
liquid i.e. a low density liquid (such as oil) for
measuring small pressure differences and ahigh density liquid (such as mercury) for largepressure differences. One end of the tube is opento the atmosphere and other end is connectedto the system whose pressure we want tomeasure [see Fig. 10.5 (b)]. The pressure P at Ais equal to pressure at point B.  What wenormally measure is the gauge pressure, whichis P - Pa, given by Eq. (10.8) and is proportionalto manometer height h.Fig 10.5  Two pressure measuring devices.Pressure is same at the same level on bothsides of the U-tube containing a fluid.  Forliquids the density varies very little over wideranges in pressure and temperature and we cantreat it safely as a constant for our presentpurposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibitslarge variations of densities with changes inpressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquidsare therefore, largely treated as incompressible.Example 10.3 The density of theatmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3.Assume that it does not change withaltitude. Then how high would the
atmosphere extend?Answer We use Eq. (10.7)rgh  =  1.29 kg mŒ3 ´ 9.8 m s2 ´ h  m = 1.01 ´ 105 Pa\ h = 7989 m » 8 kmIn reality the density of air decreases withheight. So does the value of g. The atmosphericcover extends with decreasing pressure over100 km. We should also note that the sea levelatmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm ofHg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more isa sign of an approaching storm.tExample 10.4 At a depth of 1000 m in anocean (a) what is the absolute pressure?(b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Findthe force acting on the window of area20 cm ´ 20 cm of a submarine at thisFig 10.5 (a) The mercury barometer.(b) the open tube manometer
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS251depth, the interior of which is maintainedat sea-level atmospheric pressure. (Thedensity of sea water is 1.03 ´ 103 kg m-3,g = 10m sŒ2.)Answer Here h = 1000 m and r = 1.03 ´ 103 kg m-3.(a)From Eq. (10.6), absolute pressureP = Pa + rgh= 1.01 ´ 105 Pa   + 1.03 ´ 103 kg mŒ3  ´ 10 m sŒ2 ´ 1000 m=  104.01 ´ 105 Pa» 104 atm(b)Gauge pressure is P - Pa = rgh = PgPg = 1.03 ´ 103 kg mŒ3 ´ 10 ms2 ´ 1000 m    = 103 ´ 105 Pa     » 103 atm(c)The pressure outside the submarine isP = Pa + rgh and the pressure inside it isPa. Hence, the net pressure acting on thewindow is gauge pressure, Pg = rgh. Sincethe area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, theforce acting on it isF = Pg A = 103 ´ 105 Pa ´ 0.04 m2 = 4.12 ´ 105 N  t10.2.4  Hydraulic MachinesLet us now consider what happens when we
change the pressure on a fluid contained in avessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a
piston and three vertical tubes at differentpoints.  The pressure in the horizontal cylinderis indicated by the height of liquid column in
the vertical tubes.It is necessarily the same in
all. If we push the piston, the fluid level rises in
all the tubes, again reaching the same level ineach one of them.This indicates that  when the pressure  onthe cylinder was increased, it was distributeduniformly throughout. We can say  wheneverexternal pressure is applied on any part of afluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted
undiminished and equally in all directions.This is the Pascal™s law for transmission of
fluid pressure and has many applications indaily life.A number of devices such as hydraulic liftand hydraulic brakes are based on the Pascal™slaw. In these devices fluids are used fortransmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift asshown in Fig. 10.6 two pistons are separatedby the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small
cross section A1 is used to exert a force F1directly on the liquid. The pressure P = 11FA istransmitted throughout the liquid to the largercylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2,which results in an upward force of P × A2.Therefor
e, the piston is capable of supporting alarge force (large weight of, say a car, or a truck,placed on the platform) F2 = PA2 = 12
1FA
A. Bychanging the force at A1, the platform can beArchemedes™ PrincipleFluid appears to provide partial support to the objects placed in it.  When a body is wholly or partiallyimmersed in a fluid at rest, the fluid exerts pressure on the surface of the body in contact with thefluid. The pressure is greater on lower surfaces of the body than on the upper surfaces as pressure ina fluid increases with depth. The resultant of all the forces is an upward force called buoyant force.Suppose that a cylindrical body is immersed in the fluid. The upward force on the bottom of the bodyis more than the downward force on its top. The fluid exerts a resultant upward force or buoyant forceon the body equal to  (P2-P1) A. We have seen in equation 10.4 that (P2-P1)A = rghA. Now hA is thevolume of the solid and  rhA is the weight of an equivaliant volume of the fluid. (P2-P1)A = mg. Thus theupward force exerted is equal to the weight of the displaced fluid.The result holds true irrespective of the shape of the object and here cylindrical object is consideredonly for convenience. This is Archimedes™ principle. For totally immersed objects the volume of thefluid displaced by the object is equal to its own volume. If the density of the immersed object is morethan that of the fluid, the object will sink as the weight of the body is more than the upward thrust. Ifthe density of the object is less than that of the fluid, it floats in the fluid partially submerged. Tocalculate the volume submerged. Suppose the total volume of the object is Vs and  a part Vp of it issubmerged  in the fluid.  Then the upward force which is the weight of the displaced fluid is rfgVp,which must equal the weight of the body; rsgVs = rfgVpor  rs/rf = Vp/Vs  The apparent weight of thefloating body is zero.This principle can be summarised as; ‚the loss of weight of a body submerged (partially or fully) ina fluid is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced™.
252PHYSICSttmoved up or down. Thus, the applied force hasbeen increased by a factor of 21AA and this factoris the mechanical advantage of the device. Theexample below clarifies it.Fig 10.6Schematic diagram illustrating theprinciple behind the hydraulic lift, a device
used to lift heavy loads.Example 10.5 Two syringes of differentcross sections (without needles) filled withwater are connected with a tightly fittedrubber tube filled with water. Diametersof the smaller piston and larger piston are1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a)  Findthe force exerted on  the larger piston whena force of 10 N is applied to the smallerpiston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushedin through 6.0 cm, how much does thelarger piston move out?Answer (a) Since pressure is transmittedundiminished throughout the fluid,()()
2Œ22212
Œ213/210m
10N
1/210m
AFF
App´==´
´             = 90 N(b) Water is considered to be perfectlyincompressible. Volume covered by themovement of smaller piston inwards is equal tovolume moved outwards due to the larger piston.2211ALAL=()()
2Œ2Œ21212
Œ221/210m
610m
3/210m
ALL
App´==´´
´       j 0.67 ´ 10-2 m = 0.67 cmNote, atmospheric pressure is common to bothpistons and has been ignored.tExample 10.6 In a car lift compressed airexerts a force F1 on a small piston havinga radius of 5.0 cm. This pressure istransmitted to a second piston of radius
15 cm (Fig 10.7). If the mass of the car to
be lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F1. What isthe pressure necessary to accomplish thistask? (g = 9.8 ms-2).Answer Since pressure is transmittedundiminished throughout the fluid,()()
()
2Œ2
Œ2
112
2Œ2
2510m
1350N9.8ms
1510m
AFF
App´==´
´= 1470 N
» 1.5 ´ 103 NThe air pressure that will produce thisforce is()
3512Œ211.510N
1.910Pa
510m
FPAp´===´
´This is almost double the atmosphericpressure.  tHydraulic brakes in automobiles also workon the same principle. When we apply a littleArchimedes was a Greek philosopher, mathematician, scientist and engineer. Heinvented the catapult and devised a system of pulleys and levers to handle heavyloads. The king of his native city Syracuse, Hiero II asked him to determine if his goldcrown was alloyed with some cheaper metal such as silver without damaging the crown.The partial loss of weight he experienced while lying in his bathtub suggested a solutionto him. According to legend, he ran naked through the streets of Syracuse exclaiming ﬁEureka,eureka!ﬂ, which means ﬁI have found it, I have found it!ﬂArchimedes (287 Œ 212 B.C.)
