1.1  WHAT IS PHYSICS ?Humans have always been curious about the world aroundthem. The night sky with its bright celestial objects has
fascinated humans since time immemorial. The regularrepetitions of the day and night, the annual cycle of seasons,the eclipses, the tides, the volcanoes, the rainbow have always
been a source of wonder. The world has an astonishing variety
of materials and a bewildering diversity of life and behaviour.
The inquiring and imaginative human mind has respondedto the wonder and awe of nature in different ways. One kind
of response from the earliest times has been to observe the
physical environment carefully, look for any meaningful
patterns and relations in natural phenomena, and build and
use new tools to interact with nature.  This human endeavour
led, in course of time, to modern science and technology.The word Science originates from the Latin verb Scientiameaning ‚to know™.  The Sanskrit word Vijnan and the Arabicword Ilm convey similar meaning, namely ‚knowledge™.Science, in a broad sense, is as old as human species. The
early civilisations of Egypt, India, China, Greece, Mesopotamia
and many others made vital contributions to its progress.
From the sixteenth century onwards, great strides were made
in science in Europe. By the middle of the twentieth century,
science had become a truly international enterprise, with
many cultures and countries contributing to its rapid growth.What is Science and what is the so-called ScientificMethod
?  Science is a systematic attempt to understand
natural phenomena in as much detail and depth as possible,and use the knowledge so gained to predict, modify and
control phenomena. Science is exploring, experimenting and
predicting from what we see around us. The curiosity to learn
about the world, unravelling the secrets of nature is the first
step towards the discovery of science. The scientific method
involves several interconnected steps : Systematic
observations, controlled experiments, qualitative andCHAPTER ONEPHYSICAL WORLD1.1What is physics ?1.2Scope and excitement ofphysics1.3Physics, technology andsociety1.4Fundamental forces in
nature1.5Nature of physical lawsSummaryExercises
PHYSICS2quantitative reasoning, mathematicalmodelling, prediction and verification or
falsification of theories. Speculation andconjecture also have a place in science; butultimately, a scientific theory, to be acceptable,must be verified by relevant observations  orexperiments. There is much philosophical
debate about the nature and method of sciencethat we need not discuss here.The interplay of theory and observation (orexperiment) is basic to the progress of science.
Science is ever dynamic. There is no ‚final™
theory in science and no unquestioned
authority among scientists.  As observationsimprove in detail and precision or experimentsyield new results, theories must account forthem, if necessary, by introducing modifications.
Sometimes the modifications may not be drastic
and may lie within the framework of existing
theory.  For example, when Johannes Kepler(1571-1630) examined the extensive data onplanetary motion collected by Tycho Brahe
(1546-1601), the planetary circular orbits in
heliocentric  theory (sun at the centre of the
solar system) imagined by Nicolas Copernicus(1473Œ1543) had to be replaced by ellipticalorbits to fit the data better.  Occasionally,
however, the  existing theory is simply unable
to explain new observations.  This causes amajor upheaval in science. In the beginning ofthe twentieth century, it was realised thatNewtonian mechanics, till then a very
successful theory, could not explain some of the
most basic features of atomic phenomena.
Similarly, the then accepted wave picture of lightfailed to explain the photoelectric effect properly.This led to the development of a  radically new
theory (Quantum Mechanics) to deal with atomicand molecular phenomena.Just as a new experiment may suggest analternative theoretical model, a theoretical
advance may suggest what to look for in some
experiments.  The result of experiment of
scattering of alpha particles by gold foil, in 1911
by Ernest Rutherford (1871Œ1937) establishedthe nuclear model of the atom, which thenbecame the basis of the quantum theory of
hydrogen atom given in 1913 by Niels Bohr
(1885Œ1962). On the other hand, the concept of
antiparticle was first introduced theoretically byPaul Dirac (1902Œ1984) in 1930 and confirmedtwo years later by the experimental discovery of
positron (antielectron) by Carl Anderson.Physics is a basic discipline in the categoryof Natural Sciences, which also includes otherdisciplines like Chemistry and Biology. The wordPhysics comes from a Greek word meaningnature. Its Sanskrit equivalent is Bhautiki thatis used to refer to the study of the physical world.A precise definition of this discipline is neither
possible nor necessary.  We can broadly describephysics as a study of the basic laws of  nature
and their manifestation in different naturalphenomena.  The scope of physics is describedbriefly in the next section.  Here we remark on
two principal thrusts in physics :  
unificationand 
reduction.In Physics, we attempt to explain diversephysical phenomena in terms of a few conceptsand laws.  The effort is to see the physical worldas manifestation of some universal laws in
different domains and conditions.  For example,
the same law of gravitation (given by Newton)describes the fall of an apple to the ground, themotion of the moon around the earth and the
motion of planets around the sun. Similarly, the
basic laws of electromagnetism (Maxwell™s
equations) govern all electric and magnetic
phenomena. The attempts to unify fundamental
forces of nature (section 1.4) reflect this samequest for unification.A related effort is to derive the properties of abigger, more complex, system from the properties
and interactions of its constituent simpler parts.
This approach is called reductionism and isat the heart of physics.  For example, the subject
of thermodynamics, developed in the nineteenth
century, deals with bulk systems in terms of
macroscopic quantities such as temperature,
internal energy, entropy, etc.  Subsequently, the
subjects of kinetic theory and statistical
mechanics interpreted these quantities in termsof the properties of the molecular constituentsof the bulk system.  In particular, the

temperature was seen to be related to the average
kinetic energy of molecules  of the system.1.2  SCOPE AND EXCITEMENT OF PHYSICS
We can get some idea of the scope of physics bylooking at its various sub-disciplines.  Basically,
there are two domains of interest : macroscopicand microscopic. The macroscopic domainincludes phenomena at the laboratory, terrestrial
and astronomical scales. The microscopic domain
includes atomic, molecular and nuclear
PHYSICAL WORLD3Ampere and Faraday, and encapsulated byMaxwell in his famous set of equations. The
motion of a current-carrying conductor in amagnetic field, the response of a circuit to an acvoltage (signal), 
the working of an antenna, thepropagation of radio waves in the ionosphere, etc.,
are problems of electrodynamics. Optics deals
with the phenomena involving light. The workingof telescopes and microscopes, colours exhibited
by thin films, etc., are topics in optics.

Thermodynamics, in contrast to mechanics, does
not deal with the motion of bodies as a whole.
Rather, it deals with systems in macroscopicequilibrium and is concerned with changes ininternal energy, temperature, entropy, etc., of thesystem through external work and transfer of
heat.  The efficiency of heat engines and
refrigerators, the direction of a physical orYou can now see that the scope of physics istruly vast.  It covers a tremendous range ofmagnitude of physical quantities like length,mass, time, energy, etc.  At one end, it studiesphenomena at the very small scale of length(10-14 m or even less) involving electrons, protons,etc.; at the other end, it deals with astronomicalphenomena at the scale of galaxies or even theentire universe whose extent is of the order of1026 m.  The two length scales differ by a factor of1040 or even more.  The range of time scales canbe obtained by dividing the length scales by thespeed of light : 10Œ22 s to 1018 s.  The range ofmasses goes from, say, 10
Œ30 kg  (mass of anelectron) to 1055 kg (mass of known observableuniverse). Terrestrial phenomena lie somewherein the middle of this range.Fig. 1.1Theory and experiment go hand in hand in physics and help each other™s progress. The alpha scatteringexperiments of Rutherford gave the nuclear model of the atom.*Recently, the domain intermediate between the macroscopic and the microscopic (the so-called mesoscopicphysics), dealing with a few tens or hundreds of atoms, has emerged as an exciting  field of  research.phenomena*. Classical Physics deals mainlywith macroscopic phenomena and includessubjects like Mechanics, Electrodynamics,Optics and Thermodynamics. Mechanicsfounded on Newton™s laws of motion and the lawof gravitation is concerned with the motion (or
equilibrium) of particles, rigid and deformable
bodies, and general systems of particles.  Thepropulsion of a rocket by a jet of ejecting gases,
propagation of water waves or sound waves inair, the equilibrium of a bent rod under a load,etc., are problems of mechanics.  Electrodynamics
deals with electric and magnetic phenomena
associated with charged and magnetic bodies.
Its basic laws were given by Coulomb, Oersted,chemical process, etc., are problems of interestin thermodynamics.The microscopic domain of physics deals  withthe constitution and structure of matter at theminute scales of atoms and nuclei (and even
lower scales of length) and their interaction with
different probes such as electrons, photons andother elementary particles. Classical physics isinadequate to handle this domain and Quantum
Theory is currently accepted as the proper
framework for explaining microscopic
phenomena.  Overall, the edifice of physics is
beautiful and imposing and you will appreciate
it more as you pursue the subject.
PHYSICS4Physics is exciting in many ways. To some peoplethe excitement comes from the elegance anduniversality of its basic theories, from the fact thata few basic concepts and laws can explainphenomena covering a large range of magnitudeof physical quantities. To some others, the challenge
in carrying out imaginative new experiments tounlock the secrets of nature, to verify or refutetheories, is thrilling.  Applied physics is equallydemanding. Application and exploitation of
physical laws to make useful devices is the mostinteresting and exciting part and requires greatingenuity and persistence of effort.What lies behind the phenomenal progressof physics in the last few centuries? Great
progress usually accompanies changes in ourbasic perceptions.  First, it was realised that forscientific progress, only qualitative thinking,though no doubt important, is not enough.Quantitative measurement is central to thegrowth of science, especially physics, becausethe laws of nature happen to be expressible inprecise mathematical equations. The secondmost important insight was that the basic lawsof physics are 
universal Š the same laws apply
in widely different contexts. Lastly, the strategyof approximation turned out to be verysuccessful.  Most observed phenomena in dailylife are rather complicated manifestations of thebasic laws. Scientists recognised the importanceof extracting the essential features of aphenomenon from its less significant aspects.It is not practical to take into account all thecomplexities of a phenomenon in one go.  A 
goodstrategy is to focus first on the essential features,
discover the basic principles and then introducecorrections to build a more refined theory of thephenomenon. For example, a stone and a featherdropped from the same height do not reach theground at the same time. The reason is that theessential aspect of the phenomenon, namely freefall under gravity, is complicated by thepresence of air resistance. To get the law of freefall under gravity, it is better to create asituation wherein the air resistance isnegligible. We can, for example, let the stone andthe feather fall through a long evacuated tube.In that case, the two objects will fall almost atthe same rate, giving the basic law thatacceleration due to gravity is independent of themass of the object.  With the basic law thusfound, we can go back to the feather, introduce
corrections due to air resistance, modify the
existing theory and try to build a more realisticHypothesis, axioms and modelsOne should not think that everything can be provedwith physics and mathematics. All physics, and also
mathematics, is based on assumptions, each of
which is variously called a hypothesis or axiom or
postulate, etc.For example, the universal law of gravitationproposed by Newton is an assumption or hypothesis,
which he proposed out of his ingenuity. Before him,there were several observations, experiments anddata, on the motion of planets around the sun,motion of the moon around the earth, pendulums,bodies falling towards the earth etc. Each of these
required a separate explanation, which was more
or less qualitative. What the universal law of
gravitation says is that, if we assume that any twobodies in the universe attract each other with a
force proportional to the product of their masses
and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them, then we can explain all
these observations in one stroke. It not only explainsthese phenomena, it also allows us to predict theresults of future experiments.A hypothesis is a supposition without assumingthat it is true. It would not be fair to ask anybody
to prove the universal law of gravitation, becauseit cannot be proved. It can be verified andsubstantiated by experiments and observations.An axiom is a self-evident truth while a modelis a theory proposed to explain observed
phenomena. But you need not worry at this stage
about the nuances in using these words. Forexample, next year you will learn about Bohr™s modelof hydrogen atom, in which Bohr assumed that an
electron in the hydrogen atom follows certain rules
(postutates). Why did he do that? There was a large
amount of spectroscopic data before him which noother theory could explain. So Bohr said that if weassume that an atom behaves in such a manner,
we can explain all these things at once.Einstein™s special theory of relativity is alsobased on two postulates, the constancy of the speedof electromagnetic radiation and the validity ofphysical laws in all inertial frame of reference. It
would not be wise to ask somebody to prove that
the speed of light in vacuum is constant,
independent of the source or observer.In mathematics too, we need axioms andhypotheses at every stage. Euclid™s statement that
parallel lines never meet, is a hypothesis. This means
that if we assume this statement, we can explain
several properties of straight lines and two or threedimensional figures made out of them. But if youdon™t assume it, you are free to use a different axiom
and get a new geometry, as has indeed happened inthe past few centuries and decades.
PHYSICAL WORLD5Table 1.1 Some physicists from different countries of the world and their major contributionstheory of objects falling to the earth undergravity.1.3  PHYSICS, TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETYThe connection between physics, technologyand society can be seen in many examples. Thediscipline of thermodynamics arose from theneed to understand and improve the working of
heat engines.  The steam engine, as we know,is inseparable from the Industrial Revolution inEngland in the eighteenth century, which hadgreat impact on the course of humancivilisation. Sometimes technology gives rise to
new physics; at other times physics generatesnew technology. An example of the latter is thewireless communication technology that followedthe discovery of the basic laws of electricity andmagnetism in the nineteenth century. The
applications of  physics are not always easy toforesee. As late as 1933, the great physicistErnest Rutherford had dismissed the possibilityof tapping energy from atoms. But only a fewyears later, in 1938, Hahn and Meitner
discovered the phenomenon of neutron-inducedfission of uranium, which would serve as thebasis of nuclear power reactors and nuclearweapons. Yet another important example ofphysics giving rise to technology is the silicon
‚chip™ that triggered  the computer revolution in
the last three decades of the twentieth century.A most significant area to which physics hasand will contribute is the development ofalternative energy resources.  The fossil fuels ofthe planet are dwindling fast and there is anurgent need to discover new and affordablesources of energy.  Considerable progress hasalready been made in this direction (forexample, in conversion of solar energy,geothermal energy, etc., into electricity), butmuch more is still to be accomplished.Table1.1 lists some of the great physicists,their major contribution and the country oforigin. You will appreciate from this table themulti-cultural, international character of thescientific endeavour. Table 1.2 lists someimportant technologies and the principles ofphysics  they  are  based on.  Obviously,  thesetables are not exhaustive. We urge you to try toadd many names and items to these tables withthe help of your teachers, good books andwebsites on science.  You will find that thisexercise is very educative and also great fun.And, assuredly, it will never end.  The progressof science is unstoppable!Physics is the study of nature and naturalphenomena. Physicists try to discover the rulesthat are operating in nature, on the basis ofobservations, experimentation and analysis.Physics deals with certain basic rules/laws
governing the natural world. What is the natureNameMajor contribution/discoveryCountry of
OriginArchimedesPrinciple of buoyancy; Principle of the leverGreeceGalileo GalileiLaw of inertiaItalyChristiaan HuygensWave theory 
of lightHollandIsaac NewtonUniversal law of gravitation; Laws of motion;
U.K.Reflecting telescopeMichael FaradayLaws of electromagnetic induction
U.K.James Clerk MaxwellElectromagnetic theory; Light-an
U.K.electromagnetic waveHeinrich Rudolf HertzGeneration of electromagnetic wavesGermany
J.C. BoseUltra  short radio waves
IndiaW.K. RoentgenX-rays
GermanyJ.J. ThomsonElectronU.K.Marie Sklodowska CurieDiscovery of radium 
and polonium; Studies onPoland
natural radioactivityAlbert EinsteinExplanation of 
photoelectric effect;GermanyTheory of relativity
PHYSICS6*Sections 1.4 and 1.5 contain several ideas that you may not grasp fully in your first reading. However, weadvise you to read them carefully to develop a feel for some basic aspects of  physics. These are some of the
areas which continue to occupy the physicists today.of physical laws? We shall now discuss thenature of fundamental forces and the laws that
govern the diverse phenomena of the physicalworld.1.4  FUNDAMENTAL FORCES IN NATURE*
We all have an intuitive notion of force. In ourexperience, force is needed to push, carry orthrow objects, deform or break them.  We alsoexperience the impact of forces on us, like whena moving object hits us or we are in a merry-go-
round. Going from this intuitive notion to the
proper scientific concept of force is not a trivial
matter. Early thinkers like Aristotle had wrongideas about it.  The correct notion of force was
arrived at by Isaac Newton in his famous laws of

motion. He also gave an explicit form for the force

for gravitational attraction between two bodies.
We shall learn these matters in subsequentchapters.In the macroscopic world, besides thegravitational force, we encounter several kinds
of forces: muscular force, contact forces betweenbodies, friction (which is also a contact force
parallel to the surfaces in contact), the forces
exerted by compressed or elongated springs and
taut strings and ropes (tension), the force of
buoyancy and viscous force when solids are inVictor Francis HessCosmic radiationAustriaR.A. MillikanMeasurement of electronic chargeU.S.A.
Ernest RutherfordNuclear model of atomNew Zealand
Niels BohrQuantum model 
of hydrogen atomDenmark
C.V. RamanInelastic scattering of light by molecules
IndiaLouis Victor de BorglieWave 
nature of matterFrance
M.N. SahaThermal ionisationIndiaS.N. BoseQuantum statisticsIndiaWolfgang PauliExclusion principleAustriaEnrico FermiControlled nuclear fission
ItalyWerner HeisenbergQuantum mechanics; Uncertainty principleGermanyPaul DiracRelativistic theory of electron;
U.K.Quantum statisticsEdwin HubbleExpanding 
universeU.S.A.Ernest Orlando LawrenceCyclotronU.S.A.
James ChadwickNeutron
U.K.Hideki YukawaTheory of nuclear forces
JapanHomi Jehangir BhabhaCascade process of cosmic radiation
IndiaLev Davidovich LandauTheory of condensed matter; Liquid heliumRussia
S. ChandrasekharChandrasekhar limit, 
structure and evolutionIndiaof starsJohn BardeenTransistors
; Theory of super conductivityU.S.A.
C.H. TownesMaser; LaserU.S.A.

Abdus SalamUnification of 
weak and electromagneticPakistaninteractionsNameMajor contribution/discoveryCountry of
Origin
PHYSICAL WORLD7contact with fluids, the force due to pressure ofa fluid, the force due to surface tension of a liquid,
and so on. There are also forces involving chargedand magnetic bodies. In the microscopic domainagain, we have electric and magnetic forces,nuclear forces involving protons and neutrons,
interatomic and intermolecular forces, etc.  We
shall get familiar with some of these forces in later
parts of this course.A great insight of the twentieth centuryphysics is that these different forces occurringin different contexts actually arise from only a
small number of fundamental forces in nature.
For example, the elastic spring force arises dueto the net attraction/repulsion between theneighbouring atoms of the spring when the

spring is elongated/compressed. This netattraction/repulsion can be traced to the(unbalanced) sum of electric forces between the
charged constituents of the atoms.In principle, this means that the laws for‚derived™ forces (such as spring force, friction)are not independent of the laws of fundamentalforces in nature. The  origin of these derivedforces is, however, very complex.At the present stage of our understanding,we know of four fundamental forces in nature,which are described in brief here : Table 1.2  Link between technology and physicsTechnologyScientific principle(s)Steam engineLaws of thermodynamics
Nuclear reactorControlled nuclear fission
Radio and TelevisionGeneration, propagation and detectionof electromagnetic wavesComputersDigital logicLasersLight amplification by stimulated emission ofradiationProduction of ultra high magneticSuperconductivity
fieldsRocket propulsionNewton™s laws of motion
Electric generatorFaraday™s laws of electromagnetic induction
Hydroelectric powerConversion of gravitational potential energy intoelectrical energyAeroplaneBernoulli™s principle in fluid dynamics
Particle acceleratorsMotion of 
charged particles in electromagneticfieldsSonarReflection of ultrasonic waves
Optical fibresTotal internal 
reflection of lightNon-reflecting coatingsThin film optical interference
Electron microscopeWave nature of electrons
PhotocellPhotoelectric effectFusion test reactor (Tokamak)Magnetic confinement of plasma
Giant Metrewave RadioDetection of cosmic radio waves
Telescope (GMRT)Bose-Einstein condensateTrapping and cooling of atoms by laser beams and
magnetic fields.
PHYSICS81.4.1Gravitational ForceThe gravitational force is the force of mutualattraction between any two objects by virtue of
their masses. It is a universal force. Every objectexperiences this force due to every other objectin the universe. All objects on the earth, for
example, experience the force of gravity due to
the earth. In 
particular, gravity governs themotion of the moon and artificial satellites aroundthe earth, motion of the earth and planetsaround the sun, and, of course, the motion of
bodies falling to the earth.  It plays a key role in
the large-scale phenomena of the universe, such
as formation and evolution of stars, galaxies and
galactic clusters.1.4.2 Electromagnetic Force
Electromagnetic force is the force betweencharged particles.  In the simpler case when
charges are at rest, the force is given byCoulomb™s law : attractive for unlike charges andrepulsive for like charges. 
Charges in motionproduce magnetic effects and a magnetic field
gives rise to a force on a moving charge. Electric
and magnetic effects are, in general,inseparable Œ hence the name electromagnetic

force. Like the gravitational force,
electromagnetic force acts over large distances
and does not need any intervening medium. It
is enormously strong compared to gravity. Theelectric force between two protons, for example,is 1036 times the gravitational force betweenthem, for any fixed distance.Matter, as we know, consists of elementarycharged constituents like electrons andprotons. Since the electromagnetic force is somuch stronger than the gravitational force, itdominates all phenomena at atomic andmolecular scales.  (The other two forces, as we
shall see, operate only at nuclear scales.)  Thusit is mainly the electromagnetic force thatgoverns the structure of atoms and molecules,the dynamics of  chemical reactions and themechanical, thermal and other properties of
materials.  It underlies the macroscopic forceslike  ‚tension™, ‚friction™, ‚normal force™, ‚springforce™, etc.
Gravity is always 
attractive, whileelectromagnetic force can be attractive or
repulsive.  Another way of putting it is that masscomes only in one variety (there is no negativemass), but charge comes in two varieties :positive and negative charge. This is whatmakes all the difference.  Matter is mostlyelectrically neutral (net charge is zero). Thus,electric force is largely zero and gravitationalforce dominates terrestrial phenomena. Electricforce manifests itself in atmosphere where theatoms are ionised and that leads to lightning.
Albert Einstein (1879-1955)Albert Einstein, born in Ulm, Germany in 1879, is universally regarded asone of the greatest physicists of all time. His astonishing scientific careerbegan with the publication of three path-breaking papers in 1905.  In thefirst paper, he introduced the notion of light quanta (now called photons)
and used it to explain the features of photoelectric effect that the classicalwave theory of radiation could not account for.  In the second paper, hedeveloped a theory of Brownian motion that was confirmed experimentallya few years later and provided a convincing evidence of the atomic picture of
matter. The third paper gave birth to the special theory of relativity thatmade Einstein a legend in his own life time.  In the next decade, he explored the consequences of hisnew theory which included, among other things, the mass-energy equivalence enshrined in his famousequation E = mc2.  He also created the general version of relativity (The General Theory of Relativity),which is the modern theory of gravitation. Some of Einstein™s most significant later contributions are:the notion of stimulated emission introduced in an alternative derivation of Planck™s blackbody radiation
law, static model of the universe which started modern cosmology, quantum statistics of a gas ofmassive bosons, and a critical analysis of the foundations of quantum mechanics. The year 2005 wasdeclared as International Year of  Physics, in recognition of  Einstein™s monumental contribution to
physics, in year 1905, describing revolutionary scientific ideas that have since influenced all of modernphysics.
PHYSICAL WORLD9If we reflect a little, the enormous strengthof the electromagnetic force compared togravity is evident in our daily life.  When wehold a book in our hand, we are balancing thegravitational force on the book due to the huge
mass of the earth by the ‚normal force™
provided by our hand.  The latter is nothing
but the net electromagnetic force between thecharged constituents of our hand and
the book, at the 
surface in contact. Ifelectromagnetic force were not intrinsically so
much stronger than gravity, the hand of the
strongest man would crumble under the
weight of a feather ! Indeed, to be consistent,in that circumstance, we ourselves wouldcrumble under our own weight !1.4.3  Strong Nuclear ForceThe strong nuclear force binds protons andneutrons in a nucleus. It is evident that without
some attractive force, a nucleus will beunstable due to the electric repulsion betweenits protons. This attractive force cannot be
gravitational since force of gravity is negligiblecompared to the electric force. A new basic force
must, therefore, be  invoked. The strong nuclear
force  is  the 
strongest of all fundamental forces,about 100 times the electromagnetic force instrength.  It is charge-independent and acts
equally between a proton and a proton, a
neutron and a neutron, and a proton and a
neutron. Its range is, however, extremely small,
of about nuclear dimensions (10Œ15m). It isresponsible for the stability of nuclei. Theelectron, it must be noted, does not experiencethis force.Recent developments have, however,indicated that protons and neutrons are built
out of still more elementary constituents called
quarks.1.4.4  Weak Nuclear ForceThe weak nuclear force appears only in certainnuclear processes such as the -decay of anucleus. In -decay, the nucleus emits anelectron and an uncharged particle calledneutrino.  The weak nuclear force is not as weakas the gravitational force, but much weakerthan the strong nuclear and electromagneticforces. The range of weak nuclear force isexceedingly small, of the order of 10-16 m.1.4.5  
Towards Unification of  ForcesWe remarked in section 1.1 that unification is abasic quest in physics. Great advances in
physics often amount to unification of differentSatyendranath Bose (1894-1974)Satyendranath Bose, born in Calcutta in 1894, is among the great Indianphysicists who made a fundamental contribution to the advance of sciencein the twentieth century. An outstanding student throughout, Bose startedhis career in 1916 as a lecturer in physics in Calcutta University; five years
later he joined Dacca University.  Here in 1924, in a brilliant flash of insight,Bose gave a new derivation of Planck™s law, treating radiation as a gas ofphotons and employing new statistical methods of counting of photon states.He wrote a short paper on the subject and sent it to Einstein whoimmediately recognised its great significance, translated it in German and
forwarded it for publication.  Einstein then applied the same method to agas of molecules.The key new conceptual ingredient in Bose™s work was that the particles were regarded asindistinguishable, a radical departure from the assumption that underlies the classical Maxwell-
Boltzmann statistics. It was soon realised that the new Bose-Einstein statistics was applicable to

particles with integers spins, and a new quantum statistics (Fermi-Dirac statistics) was needed for

particles with half integers spins satisfying Pauli™s exclusion principle. Particles with integers spins
are now known as bosons in honour of Bose.An important consequence of Bose-Einstein statistics is that a gas of molecules below a certaintemperature will undergo a phase transition to a state where a large fraction of atoms populate the
same lowest energy state. Some seventy years were to pass before the pioneering ideas of Bose, developed
further by Einstein, were dramatically confirmed in the observation of a new state of matter in a dilute
gas of ultra cold alkali atoms - the Bose-Eintein  condensate.
PHYSICS10theories and domains. Newton unified terrestrialand celestial domains under a common law of
gravitation.  The experimental discoveries ofOersted and Faraday showed that electric andmagnetic phenomena are in general
inseparable.  Maxwell unified electromagnetism
and optics with the discovery that light is an
electromagnetic wave.  Einstein attempted tounify gravity and electromagnetism but could
not succeed in this venture. But this did not
deter physicists from zealously pursuing the
goal of unification of forces.Recent decades have seen much progress onthis front.  The electromagnetic and the weaknuclear force have now been unified and areseen as aspects of a single ‚electro-weak™ force.
What this unification actually means cannot
be explained here. Attempts have been (and are
being) made to unify the electro-weak and the
strong force and even to unify the gravitational
force with the rest of the fundamental forces.
Many of these ideas are still speculative and
inconclusive. Table 1.4 summarises some of the
milestones in the progress towards unification
of forces in nature.1.5   NATURE OF PHYSICAL LAWSPhysicists explore the universe. Theirinvestigations, based on scientific processes,
range from particles that are smaller thanatoms in size to stars that are very far away. Inaddition to finding the facts by observation andexperimentation, physicists attempt to discoverthe laws that summarise (often as mathematical
equations) these facts.In any physical phenomenon governed bydifferent forces, several quantities may changewith time. A remarkable fact is that some specialphysical quantities, however, remain constant
in time. They are the conserved quantities of
nature. Understanding these conservationprinciples is very important to describe theobserved phenomena quantitatively.For motion under an external conservativeforce, the total mechanical energy i.e. the sumof kinetic and potential energy of a body is a
constant. The familiar example is the free fall ofan object under gravity. Both the kinetic energyof the object and its potential energy change
continuously with time, but the sum remains
fixed. If the object is released from rest, the initialTable 1.4  Progress in unification of different forces/domains in natureTable 1.3  Fundamental  forces  of  natureNameRelative
RangeOperates among
strengthGravitational force10
Œ39InfiniteAll objects in the universeWeak nuclear force10
Œ13Very short, Sub-nuclearSome elementary particles,size (10Œ16m)particularly electron and
neutrinoElectromagnetic force10
Œ2InfiniteCharged particlesStrong nuclear force1Short, 
nuclearNucleons, heaviersize (10Œ15m)elementary particles

PHYSICAL WORLD11potential energy is completely converted into thekinetic energy of the object just before it hits
the ground. This law restricted for a conservativeforce should not be confused with the generallaw of conservation of energy of an isolatedsystem (which is the basis of the First Law ofThermodynamics).The concept of energy is central to physicsand the expressions for energy can be writtenfor every physical system. When all forms of
energy e.g., heat, mechanical energy, electrical
energy etc., are counted, it turns out that energy
is conserved. The general law of conservation ofenergy is true for all forces and for any kind oftransformation between different forms ofenergy. In the falling object example, if you
include the effect of air resistance during the
fall and see the situation after the object hits
the ground and stays there, the total
mechanical energy is obviously not conserved.The general law of energy conservation, however,is still applicable.  The initial potential energy
of the stone gets transformed into other formsof energy : heat and sound. (Ultimately, soundafter it is absorbed becomes heat.) The total
energy of the system (stone plus the

surroundings) remains unchanged.The law of conservation of energy is thoughtto be valid across all domains of nature, fromthe microscopic to the macroscopic. It is
routinely applied in the analysis of atomic,
nuclear and elementary particle processes.  Atthe other end, all kinds of violent phenomenaoccur in the universe all the time.  Yet the total
energy of the universe (the most ideal isolatedsystem possible!) is believed to remain
unchanged.Until the advent of Einstein™s theory ofrelativity, the law of conservation of mass was
regarded as another basic conservation law ofnature, since matter was thought to be
indestructible. It was (and still is) an importantprinciple used, for example, in the analysis ofchemical reactions. A chemical reaction is
basically a rearrangement of atoms among
different molecules.  If the total binding energyof the reacting molecules is less than the totalbinding energy of the product molecules, thedifference appears as heat and the reaction is
exothermic.  The opposite is true for energy
absorbing (endothermic) reactions.  However,
since the atoms are merely rearranged but notdestroyed, the total mass of the reactants is thesame as the total mass of the products in a
chemical reaction. The changes in the binding
energy are too small to be measured as changes
in mass.According to Einstein™s theory, mass m isequivalent to energy E given by the relation
E= mc2, where c is speed of light in vacuum.In a nuclear process mass gets converted toenergy (or vice-versa). This is the energy whichis released in a nuclear power generation andnuclear explosions.Sir C.V. Raman (1888-1970)Chandrashekhara Venkata Raman  was born on 07 Nov 1888 in Thiruvanaikkaval.He finished his schooling by the age of eleven. He graduated from PresidencyCollege, Madras. After finishing his education he joined financial services of theIndian Government.While in Kolkata, he started working on his area of interest at Indian Asso-ciation for Cultivation of Science founded  by Dr. Mahendra Lal Sirkar, during hisevening hours. His area of interest included vibrations, variety of musical instru-
ments, ultrasonics, diffraction and so on.In 1917 he was offered Professorship at Calcutta University. In 1924 he waselected ‚Fellow™ of the Royal Society of London and received Nobel prize in Physicsin 1930 for his discovery, now known as Raman Effect.The Raman Effect deals with scattering of light by molecules of a mediumwhen they are excited to vibrational energy levels. This work opened totally newavenues for research for years to come.He spent his later years at Bangalore, first at Indian Institute of Science and then at Raman Re-search Institute. His work has inspired generation of young students.
PHYSICS12Energy is a scalar quantity.  But all conservedquantities are not necessarily scalars.  The totallinear momentum and the total angularmomentum (both vectors) of an isolated systemare also conserved quantities.  These laws can
be derived from Newton™s laws of motion inmechanics.  But their validity goes beyondmechanics.  They are the basic conservation
laws of nature in all domains, even in those
where Newton™s laws may not be valid.Besides their great simplicity and generality,the conservation laws of nature are very useful
in practice too.  It often happens that we cannotsolve the full dynamics of a complex probleminvolving different particles and forces. Theconservation laws can still provide usefulresults.  For example, we may not know thecomplicated forces that act during a collision
of two automobiles; yet momentum
conservation law enables us to bypass thecomplications and predict or rule out possibleoutcomes of the collision. In nuclear and
elementary particle phenomena also, theconservation 
laws are important tools ofanalysis.  Indeed, using the conservation lawsof energy and momentum for -decay, WolfgangPauli (1900-1958) correctly predicted in 1931the existence of a new particle (now calledneutrino) emitted in -decay along with theelectron.Conservation laws have a deep connectionwith symmetries of nature that you will explore
in more advanced courses in physics.  Forexample, an important observation is that thelaws of nature do not change with time!  If you
perform an experiment in your laboratory todayand repeat the same experiment (on the sameobjects under identical conditions) after a year,
the results are bound to be the same.  It turns
out that this symmetry of nature with respect totranslation (i.e. displacement) in time isequivalent to the law of conservation of energy.
Likewise, space is homogeneous and there is no(intrinsically) preferred location in the universe.To put it more clearly, the laws of nature are the
same everywhere in the universe. (Caution : the
phenomena may differ from place to place
because of differing conditions at differentlocations. For example, the acceleration due togravity at the moon is one-sixth that at the earth,
but the law of gravitation is the same both onthe moon and the earth.)  This symmetry of thelaws of nature with respect to translation inspace gives rise to conservation of linearmomentum.  In the same way isotropy of space(no intrinsically preferred direction in space)
underlies the law of conservation of angularmomentum*. The conservation laws of charge andother attributes of elementary particles can alsobe related to certain abstract symmetries.Symmetries of space and time and other abstract
symmetries play a central role in modern theoriesof fundamental forces in nature.*See Chapter 7Conservation laws in physicsConservation of energy, momentum, angularmomentum, charge, etc are considered to befundamental laws in physics. At this moment,there are many such conservation laws. Apart fromthe above four, there are others which mostly dealwith quantities which have been introduced innuclear and particle physics. Some of theconserved quantities are called spin, baryonnumber, strangeness, hypercharge, etc, but youneed not worry about them.A conservation law is a hypothesis, based onobservations and experiments. It is important toremember that a conservation law cannot beproved. It can be verified, or disproved, byexperiments. An experiment whose result is  inconformity with the law verifies or substantiatesthe law; it does not prove the law. On the otherhand, a single experiment whose result goesagainst the law is enough to disprove it.It would be wrong to ask somebody to provethe law of conservation of energy. This law is anoutcome of our experience over several centuries,and it has been found to be valid in allexperiments, in mechanics, thermodynamics,electromagnetism, optics, atomic and nuclearphysics, or any other area.Some students feel that they can prove theconservation of mechanical energy from a bodyfalling under gravity, by adding the kinetic andpotential energies at a point and showing that itturns out to be constant. As pointed out above,this is only a verification of the law, not its proof.
PHYSICAL WORLD13SUMMARY1.Physics deals with the study of the basic laws of nature and their manifestation in
different phenomena. The basic laws of physics are universal and apply in widely differentcontexts and conditions.2.The scope of physics is wide, covering a tremendous range of magnitude of physical
quantities.3.Physics and technology are related to each other.  Sometimes technology gives rise to
new physics; at other times physics generates new technology.  Both have direct impact
on society.4.There are four fundamental forces in nature that govern the diverse phenomena of the
macroscopic and the microscopic world. These are the ‚gravitational force™, the‚electromagnetic force™, the ‚strong nuclear force™, and the ‚weak nuclear force™.  Unificationof different forces/domains in nature is a basic quest in physics.5.The physical quantities that remain unchanged in a process are called conserved
quantities. Some of the general conservation laws in nature include the laws of
conservation of mass, energy, linear momentum, angular momentum, charge, parity,etc.  Some conservation laws are true for one fundamental force but not for the other.6.Conservation laws have a deep connection with symmetries of nature.  Symmetries of
space and time, and other types of symmetries play a central role in modern theories offundamental forces in nature.EXERCISESNote for the studentThe exercises given here are meant to enhance your awareness about the issues surroundingscience, technology and society and to encourage you to think and formulate your views
about them.  The questions may not have clear-cut ‚objective™ answers.Note for the teacherThe exercises given here are not  for the purpose of a formal examination.1.1Some of the most profound statements on the nature of science have come fromAlbert Einstein, one of the greatest scientists of all time.  What do you think didEinstein mean when he said :  ﬁThe most incomprehensible thing about the world is
that it is comprehensibleﬂ?1.2ﬁEvery great physical theory starts as a heresy and ends as a dogmaﬂ. Give some
examples from the history of science of the validity of this incisive remark.1.3ﬁPolitics is the art of the possibleﬂ. Similarly, ﬁScience is the art of the solubleﬂ.
Explain this beautiful aphorism on the nature and practice of science.1.4Though India now has a large base in science and technology, which is fast expanding,
it is still a long way from realising its potential of becoming a world leader in science.
Name some important factors, which in your view have hindered the advancement ofscience in India.1.5No physicist has ever ﬁseenﬂ an electron.  Yet, all physicists believe in the existence ofelectrons.  An intelligent but superstitious man advances this analogy to argue that‚ghosts™ exist even though no one has ‚seen™ one.  How will you refute his argument?
1.6The shells of crabs found around a particular coastal location in Japan seem mostly
to resemble the legendary face of a Samurai.  Given below are two explanations of thisobserved fact.  Which of these strikes you as a scientific explanation ?(a)A tragic sea accident several centuries ago drowned a young Samurai. As a tribute
to his bravery, nature through its inscrutable ways immortalised his face byimprinting it on the crab shells in that area.
