78Indian Constitution at WorkChapter FourEXECUTIVEINTRODUCTIONLegislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government.  Together,they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and lookafter the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work incoordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In aparliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: thelegislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of theexecutive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about thechanges that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After readingthis chapter, you will be able to±make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;±understand the constitutional position of the President of India;±know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the
importance of the Prime Minister; and±understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.
79Chapter 4: ExecutiveWHAT IS AN EXECUTIVE?Who is in charge of the administration of your school?Who takes important decisions in a school or a university?In any organisation, some office holder has to takedecisions and implement those decisions. We call thisactivity administration or management. Butadministration requires a body at the top that will takepolicy decisions or the big decisions and supervise andcoordinate the routine administrative functioning. Youmay have heard about the executives of big companies,banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a bodyof those who function as the chief administrators or theexecutives of that organisation. Some office holders decidethe policies and rules and regulations and then some officeholders implement those decisions in actual day-to-dayfunctioning of the organisation. The word executive means
a body of persons that looks after the implementation ofrules and regulations in actual practice.In the case of government also, one body may takepolicy decisions and decide about rules and regulations,while the other one would be in charge of implementingthose rules. The organ of government that primarily looksafter the function of implementation and administrationis called the executive.What are the principal functions of the executive?Executive is the branch of government responsible for theimplementation of laws and policies adopted by thelegislature. The executive is often involved in framing ofpolicy. The official designations of the executive vary fromcountry to country. Some countries have presidents, whileothers have chancellors. The executive branch is not justabout presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also
extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants).While the heads of government and their ministers, saddledwith the overall responsibility of government policy, aretogether known as the political executive, thoseresponsible for day to day administration are called the
permanent executive.I remember somebody sayingthat the executive in a democracy
is accountable to people. Is that
also true of executives in big
companies? Aren™t they called
CEOs? Who are they
accountable to?
80Indian Constitution at WorkWHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE?Every country may not have the same type of executive. You mayhave heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England.But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are verydifferent from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, thepowers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of theKing of Nepal. Both India and France have prime ministers, but theirroles are different from each other. Why is this so?ActivityProcure a photograph of the SAARC summitmeeting or the meeting of G-8 countries and listthose who attended the meeting. Can you imaginewhy those people and not some others are attendingthe meeting?To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature ofexecutive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a
presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of thepresident. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with aconstitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chiefof state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France,both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi-presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister aswell as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsibleto the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with theEmperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the headof government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the presidentas the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head ofgovernment. Russia has a semi-presidential system where presidentis the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by thepresident, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentarysystem in which president is the ceremonial head of state and thechancellor is the head of government.In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as wellas head of government. In this system the office of president is verypowerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a systeminclude the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America.
81Chapter 4: Executive
82Indian Constitution at WorkSemi-Presidential Executive in Sri LankaIn 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of
Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of ExecutivePresidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that boththe President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political partyor to different political parties.The President has vast powers under the constitution. The Presidentchooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the
Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, thePresident has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers.Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the
Government.Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removedexcept by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirdsof the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not lessthan one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the
Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speakercan report the matter to the Supreme Court.How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lankadifferent from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in theimpeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka.In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head ofgovernment. Most parliamentary systems have a president or amonarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, therole of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and primeminister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with
such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as wellas Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and aprime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president
may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it ispossible that sometimes the president and the prime minister maybelong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with
such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc.
83Chapter 4: ExecutivePARLIAMENTARY EXECUTIVE IN INDIAWhen the Constitution of India was written, India alreadyhad some experience of running the parliamentary system
under the Acts of 1919 and 1935. This experience hadshown that in the parliamentary system, the executivecan be effectively controlled by the representatives of the
people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to
ensure that the government would be sensitive to publicexpectations and would be responsible and accountable.The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was
the presidential form of government. But the presidentialexecutive puts much emphasis on the president as thechief executive and as source of all executive power.  There
is always the danger of personality cult in presidentialexecutive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanteda government that would have a strong executive branch,
but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there
to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentaryform there are many mechanisms that ensure that theexecutive will be answerable to and controlled by the
legislature or people™s representatives.  So the Constitutionadopted the parliamentary system of executive for thegovernments both at the national and State levels.According to this system, there is a President who isthe  formal Head of the state of India and the Prime MinisterCheck your progress
Neha: It is really very simple. A country having
a president has a presidential executive andone with a prime minister has parliamentaryexecutive.How would you explain to Neha that this is notalways the case?Haven™t we had very strongPrime Ministers? Does it mean
that even the parliamentary
system is not fool proof against
personality cult? That means
people and the legislatures have
to be constantly vigilant!
84Indian Constitution at Workand the Council of Ministers, which run the government at thenational level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers.The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Unionformally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers
through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. ThePresident is elected for a period of five years. But there is no directelection by the people for the office of President. The President is elected
indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinarycitizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place inaccordance with the principle of proportional representation with single
transferable vote.The President can be removed from office only by Parliament byfollowing the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a
special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only groundfor impeachment is violation of the Constitution.Power and position of PresidentArticle 74 (1): There shall be a Council ofMinisters with the Prime Minister at the head
to aid and advise the President who shallin the exercise of his functions, act inaccordance with such advice.Provided that the President may requirethe Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice–.., and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered aftersuch reconsideration.Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that theadvice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the
scope of the President™s powers, a specific mention was made in theConstitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council ofMinisters will be binding on the President. By another amendmentmade later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of
Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsideredadvice of the Council of Ministers.
85Chapter 4: ExecutiveWe have already seen that President is the formal headof the government. In this formal sense, the President haswide ranging executive, legislative, judicial and emergencypowers. In a parliamentary system, these powers are inreality used by the President only on the advice of the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Councilof Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabhaand they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the
President has to follow the advice of the Council ofMinisters.ﬁWe did not give him any real
power but we have made hisposition one of authority and
dignity. The constitution wantsto create neither a realexecutive nor a merefigurehead, but a head thatneither reigns nor governs; it
wants to create a greatfigurehead...ﬂAm I just a figurehead or am I
asking real questions? Did the
textbook writers give me power
to ask questions I wish to ask
or am I asking questions they
have in their mind?Jawaharlal NehruCAD, Vol. VI, p. 734Discretionary Powers of the PresidentOn the basis of the above discussion can we infer that thePresident has no discretionary power under anycircumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment.
Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informedof all important matters and deliberations of the Councilof Ministers. The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
the information that the President may call for. ThePresident often writes to the Prime Minister and expresseshis views on matters confronting the country.
