FreedomFreedomPolitical Theory17Chapter 2FreedomHuman history provides many examples of people and communities which have been
dominated, or enslaved, or exploited, by more powerful groups. But it also provides us

with inspiring examples of heroic struggles against such domination. What is this freedom

for which people have been willing to sacrifice and die? In its essence, the struggle for
freedom represents the desire of people to be in control of their own lives and destinies
and to have the opportunity to express themselves freely through their choices and
activities. Not just individuals but societies also value their independence and wish toprotect their culture and future.
However, given the diverse interests and ambitions of people any form of social
living requires some rules and regulation. These rules may require some constraints

to be imposed on the freedom of individuals but it is recognised that such constraints
may also free us from insecurity and provide us with the conditions in which we can
develop ourselves. In political theory much of the discussion regarding freedom has

therefore focused on trying to evolve principles by which we can distinguish betweensocially necessary constraints and other restrictions. There has also been debate about
possible limitations on freedom which may result from the social and economic

structures of a society. In this chapter we will look at some of these debates.After studying this chapter you should be able to:Understand the importance of freedom for individuals and societies.Explain the difference between the negative and positive dimensions of freedom.
Explain what is meant by the term ‚harm principle™.
Overview
FreedomFreedomPolitical Theory182.1 THE IDEAL OF FREEDOMBefore we set out to answer these questions, let us stop for a momentand consider this. The autobiography of one of the greatest persons

of the twentieth century, Nelson Mandela, is titled Long Walk to
Freedom.
 In this book he talks about his personal struggle againstthe apartheid regime in South Africa, about the resistance of his
people to the segregationist policies of the white regime, about the

humiliations, hardships and police brutalities suffered by the black

people of South Africa. These ranged from being bundled into
townships and being denied easy movement about the country, tobeing denied a free choice of whom to marry. Collectively, suchmeasures constituted a body of constraints imposed by the apartheidregime that discriminated between citizens based on their race. For
Mandela and his colleagues it was the struggle against such unjust
constraints, the struggle to remove the obstacles to the freedom of

all the people of South Africa (not just the black or the coloured
but also the white people), that was the Long Walk to Freedom
.For this freedom, Mandela spent twenty-eight
years of his life in jail, often in solitary
confinement. Imagine what it meant to give upone™s youth for an ideal,
to voluntarily give up
the pleasure of talkingwith one™s friends, ofplaying one™s favouritegame (Mandela loved
boxing), of wearing one™sfavourite clothes, of listening to one™sfavourite music, of enjoying the manyfestivals that are part of one™s life. Imagine
giving all these up and choosing instead
to be locked up alone in a room, not

knowing when one would be released, only

because one campaigned for the freedom

of one™s people.  For freedom Mandela paida very high personal cost.Do only great men
and women fightfor great principles
like freedom? Whatdoes this principlemean for me?
FreedomFreedomPolitical Theory19Now, take another case. Gandhiji™s thoughtson non-violence have been a source of inspirationfor Aung San Suu Kyi as she remains today underhouse arrest in Myanmaar, separated from her

children, unable to visit her husband when he was

dying of cancer, because she feared that if she left

Myanmaar to visit him in England she would not
be able to return. Aung San Suu Kyi sees her
freedom as connected to the freedom of her people.
Her book of essays bears the title Freedom from Fear
. She says,ﬁfor me real freedom is freedom from fear and unless you can live
free from fear you cannot live a dignified human lifeﬂ. These are

deep thoughts that lead us to pause and consider their implications.
We must not, her words suggest, be afraid of the opinions of other
people, or of the attitude of authority, or of the reactions of themembers of our community to the things we want to do, of the
ridicule of our peers, or of speaking our mind. Yet we find that we

often exhibit such fear. For Aung San Suu Kyi living a ‚dignified

human life™ requires us to be able to overcome such fear.
From these two books of Nelson Mandela and Aung
San Suu Kyi, we can see the power of the ideal of
freedom, an ideal that was at the centre of our national

struggle and the struggles of the peoples of Asia and
Africa against British, French and Portuguese

colonialism.
2.2 WHAT
 IS FREEDOM?A simple answer to the question ‚what is freedom™ is
absence of constraints. Freedom is said to exist when
external constraints on the individual are absent. In

terms of this definition an individual could be

considered free if he/she is not subject to external
controls or coercion and is able to make independentdecisions and act in an autonomous way. However,

absence of constraints is only one dimension offreedom. Freedom is also about expanding the ability
Can you think ofsomeone in your village,town or district who has
struggled for his/herown freedom or the
freedom of others? Write

a short note aboutthat person and theparticular aspect of
freedom which he/she
struggled to protect.
LET™S DO ITDo
