26Indian Constitution at WorkChapter TwoRIGHTS IN THE INDIANCONSTITUTIONINTRODUCTIONA constitution is not only about the composition of the various organs ofgovernment and the relations among them. As we studied in the last chapter,the constitution is a document that sets limits on the powers of the governmentand ensures a democratic system in which all persons enjoy certain rights. In thischapter, we shall study the Fundamental Rights contained in the IndianConstitution.  Part three of the Constitution of India lists the Fundamental
Rights and also mentions the limits on these rights. In the past fifty years, thescope of rights has changed and in some respects, expanded. After studying thischapter, you would know±what are the various Fundamental Rights listed in the Constitution of India;±how these rights are protected;±what role the judiciary has played in protecting and interpreting these rights;
and±what is the difference between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive
Principles of State Policy.
27Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian ConstitutionTHE IMPORTANCE OF RIGHTSIn 1982 during the construction work for Asian Games thegovernment engaged a few contractors. These contractors employeda large number of very poor construction workers from differentparts of the country to build the flyovers and stadiums. These workerswere kept in poor working conditions and were paid less than the
minimum wages decided by the government.A team of social scientists studied their poor condition andpetitioned the Supreme Court. They argued that employing a personto work for less than the minimum prescribed wage amounts tobegar or forced labour, which is a violation of the Fundamental Rightagainst exploitation. The court accepted this plea and directed the
government to ensure that thousands of workers get the prescribed
wages for their work.Machal Lalung was 23 when he was arrested. A resident ofChuburi village of Morigaon district of Assam, Machal was charged
of causing grievous injuries. He was found mentally too unstable to
stand trial and was sent as under trial to Lok Priya Gopinath Bordoloi
Mental Hospital in Tejpur for treatment.Machal was treated successfully and doctors wrote twice to jailauthorities in 1967 and 1996 that he was fit to stand  trial. But no
one paid any attention. Machal Lalung remained in ﬁjudicial custody.™™Machal Lalung was released in July 2005. He was 77 then. Hespent 54 years under custody during which his case never came upfor hearing. He was freed when a team appointed by the NationalHuman Rights Commission intervened after an inspection of
undertrials in the State.Machal™s entire life was wasted because a proper trialagainst him never took place. Our Constitution gives everycitizen the right to ‚life and liberty™: this means that every
citizen must also have the right to fair and speedy trial.
Machal™s case shows what happens when rights granted
by the Constitution are not available in practice.What if Machal was a richWhat if Machal was a richWhat if Machal was a richWhat if Machal was a richWhat if Machal was a richand powerful man? Whatand powerful man? Whatand powerful man? Whatand powerful man? Whatand powerful man? Whatif those working with theif those working with theif those working with theif those working with theif those working with theconstruction contractorconstruction contractorconstruction contractorconstruction contractorconstruction contractorwere engineers? Wouldwere engineers? Wouldwere engineers? Wouldwere engineers? Wouldwere engineers? Wouldtheir rights have beentheir rights have beentheir rights have beentheir rights have beentheir rights have beenviolated?violated?
violated?violated?
violated?
