176Indian Constitution at WorkChapter EightLOCALGOVERNMENTSINTRODUCTIONIn a democracy, it is not sufficient to have an elected government at the centreand at the State level. It is also necessary that even at the local level, there
should be an elected government to look after local affairs. In this chapter, youwill study the structure of local government in our country. You will also studythe importance of the local governments and ways to give them independentpowers. After studying this chapter, you will know:±the importance of local government bodies;±the provisions made by the 73rd and 74th amendments; and±functions and responsibilities of the local government bodies.
177Chapter 8: Local GovernmentsWHY LOCAL G
OVERNMENTS?Geeta Rathore belongs to Jamonia Talab Gram Panchayat, Sehoredistrict, Madhya Pradesh. She was elected Sarpanch in 1995 from
a reserved seat; but in 2000, the village people rewarded her for heradmirable work by electing her again - this time from a non-reservedseat. From a housewife, Geeta has grown into a leader displaying
political farsightedness - she has harnessed the collective energy of
her Panchayat to renovate water tanks, build a school building,construct village roads, fight against domestic violence and atrocitiesagainst women, create environmental awareness, and encourage
afforestation and water management in her village. ŠPanchayatiRaj Update Vol. XI, No 3 February 2004.There is another story of yet another woman achiever. She wasthe President (Sarpanch) of a Gram Panchayat of Vengaivasal villagein Tamil Nadu. In 1997, the Tamil Nadu government allotted two
hectares of land to 71 government employees. This piece of land fell
within the vicinity of this Gram Panchayat. On the instructions of
higher authorities the District Collector of Kancheepuram directedthe President of the Gram Panchayat to pass a resolution endorsingthe allotment of the said land for the purpose already decided. The
President and the Gram Panchayat refused to pass such an orderand the Collector issued an order to acquire the land. The GramPanchayat filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court against the
Collector™s action. The single judge bench of the High Court upheldthe Collector™s order and ruled that there was no need to take thePanchayat™s consent. The Panchayat appealed to the Division bench
against the single judge™s order. In its order, the Division Bench
reversed the order of the single judge. The judges held that thegovernment order amounted to not only infringement of the powersof the Panchayats but a gross violation of the constitutional status of
the Panchayats. Š, Panchayati Raj Update, Vol. 12: Vol. XII,June  2005Both these stories are not isolated incidents. They arerepresentative of a larger transformation that is takingplace across India especially after constitutional status
was accorded to local government institutions in 1993.But aren™t there cases of malemembers of the village panchayat
harassing the woman Sarpanch in
some places? Why are men not
happy when women assume
positions of responsibility?
178Indian Constitution at WorkLocal government is government at the village anddistrict level. Local government is about governmentclosest to the common people. Local government is aboutgovernment that involves the day-to-day life and problemsof ordinary citizens. Local government believes that local
knowledge and local interest are essential ingredients fordemocratic decision making. They are also necessary forefficient and people-friendly administration. The
advantage of local government is that it is so near thepeople. It is convenient for the people to approach thelocal government for solving their problems both quickly
and with minimum cost. In the story of Geeta Rathore, we
noticed that she was able to bring about a significantchange in Jamonia Talab because of her pro-active roleas Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.  Vengaivasal village
is able to still retain its land and the right to decide whatto do with it because of the relentless efforts of its GramPanchayat President and members. So, local governments
can be very effective in protecting the local interests of thepeople.Democracy is about meaningful participation. It is alsoabout accountability. Strong and vibrant localgovernments ensure both active participation andpurposeful accountability. Geeta Rathore™s story is oneof committed participation. Vengaivasal village Gram
Panchayat™s relentless efforts to secure its rights over itsown land were an example of a mission to ensureaccountability.  It is at the level of local government that
common citizens can be involved in decision makingconcerning their lives, their needs and above all theirdevelopment.It is necessary that in a democracy, tasks, which canbe performed locally, should be left in the hands of thelocal people and their representatives. Common peopleare more familiar with their local government than with
the government at the State or national level. They arealso more concerned with what local government does orhas failed to do as it has a direct bearing and impact onIs it possible that we only hadgovernments at the local level
and a coordinating body at the
national level? I think
Mahatma Gandhi advocated
some ideas along these lines.
179Chapter 8: Local Governmentstheir day-to-day life. Thus, strengthening localgovernment is like strengthening democratic processes.Check your progress
±How does local government strengthendemocracy?±In the example given above, what do you thinkthe Government of Tamil Nadu should havedone?GROWTH OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN INDIALet us now discuss how local government has grown inIndia and what our Constitution says about it. It is
believed that self-governing village communities existedin India from the earliest times in the form of ‚sabhas™(village assemblies). In the course of time, these village
bodies took the shape of Panchayats (an assembly of five
persons) and these Panchayats resolved issues at thevillage level. Their role and functions kept on changing atdifferent points of time.In modern times, elected local government bodies werecreated after 1882. Lord Rippon, who was the Viceroy of
India at that time, took the initiative in creating these
bodies. They were called the local boards. However, dueto slow progress in this regard, the Indian NationalCongress urged the government to take necessary steps
to make all local bodies more effective. Following the
Government of India Act 1919, village panchayats wereestablished in a number of provinces. This trend continuedafter the Government of India Act of 1935.During India™s freedom movement, Mahatma Gandhihad strongly pleaded for decentralisation of economic and
political power. He believed that strengthening village
panchayats was a means of effective decentralisation. Alldevelopment initiatives must have local involvement inI don™t know about the past,
but I suspect that a non-elected
village panchayat would
naturally be dominated by the
village elders, the rich and men
from upper strata.
180Indian Constitution at Workorder to be successful.  Panchayats therefore were looked upon asinstruments of decentralisation and participatory democracy.  Our
national movement was concerned about the enormousconcentration of powers in the hands of the Governor General sittingat Delhi. Therefore, for our leaders, independence meant an assurance
that there will be decentralisation of decision making, executive andadministrative powers.The independence of India should mean the independence
of the whole of India–Independence must begin at thebottom. Thus every village will be a republic... It follows
therefore that every village has to be self-sustained andcapable of managing its affairs. In this structurecomposed of innumerable villages, there will be ever-widening, ever-ascending circles. Life will be a pyramidwith the apex sustained by the bottom - Mahatma GandhiWhen the Constitution was prepared, the subject of localgovernment was assigned to the States. It was also mentioned in theDirective Principles as one of the policy directives to all governments
in the country. As you have read in Chapter 2, being a part of the
Directive Principles of State Policy, this provision of the Constitutionwas non-justiciable and primarily advisory in its nature.It is felt that the subject of local government including panchayatsdid not receive adequate importance in the Constitution. Do you
know why this happened? A few reasons can be advanced here.Firstly, the turmoil due to the Partition resulted in a strong unitary
inclination in the Constitution. Nehru himself looked upon extremelocalism as a threat to unity and integration of the nation. Secondly,there was a powerful voice in the Constituent Assembly led by
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar which felt that the faction and caste-ridden nature
of rural society would defeat the noble purpose of local governmentat the rural level.However, nobody denied the importance of people™s participationin development planning. Many members of the Constituent
Assembly wanted Village Panchayats to be the basis of democracy
181Chapter 8: Local Governmentsin India but they were concerned about factionalism andmany other ills present in the villages.ﬁ– in the interests ofdemocracy, the villagesmaybe trained in the art of
self-government, evenautonomy... We must be ableto reform the villages andintroduce democraticprinciples of government
there–ﬂLocal Governments in Independent IndiaLocal governments got a fillip after the 73rd and 74thConstitution Amendment Acts. But even before that, someefforts in the direction of developing local government bodies
had already taken place. First in the line was the
Community Development Programme in 1952, which
sought to promote people™s participation in local
development in a range of activities. In this background, a
three-tier Panchayati R
aj system of local government wasrecommended for the rural areas. Some States (like Gujarat,
Maharashtra) adopted the system of elected local bodies
around 1960. But in many States those local bodies did
not have enough powers and functions to look after the
local development. They were very much dependent on the
State and central governments for financial assistance.
Many States did not think it necessary to establish elected
local bodies. In many instances, local bodies were dissolved
and the local government was handed over to government
officers. Many States had indirect elections to most localbodies. In many States, elections to the local bodies werepostponed from time to time.Why are people afraid offactionalism at the village level
when all the political parties and
organisations or even my class
has factions? Are groups and
factions always so bad?Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, CAD, Vol. VII, p. 428, 17 November 1948
