JusticeSocial JusticePolitical Theory53Chapter 4Social JusticeOverviewJust as we intuitively understand what love means even if we cannot explain all itsdifferent shades of meaning, we also have an intuitive understanding of justice even

though we may not be able to define it precisely. In that sense justice is a lot like love.

In addition, both love and justice evoke passionate responses from their advocates.

And as with love, no one hates justice, everyone wants justice for oneself and to some
extent for others also. But unlike love, which is an aspect of our relationships with afew people whom we know well, justice concerns our life in society, the way in which
public life is ordered and the principles according to which social goods and social

duties are distributed among different members of society. As such, questions of

justice are of central importance for politics.
After going through this chapter you should be able to:Identify some of the principles of justice which have been put forward in differentsocieties and at different periods of time.Explain what is meant by distributive justice.Discuss John Rawls™ argument that a fair and just society would be in the interestof all members and could be defended on rational grounds.
JusticeSocial Justice54Political Theory4.1 WHAT
 IS JUSTICE?All cultures and traditions have grappled with questions of justice
although they may have interpreted the concept in different ways.

For instance, in ancient Indian society, justice was associated withdharma
 and maintaining dharma 
or a just social order, was
considered to be a primary duty of kings. In China, Confucius, thefamous philosopher argued that kings should maintain justice by
punishing wrong doers and rewarding the virtuous. In fourth century
B.C. Athens (Greece), Plato discussed issues of justice in his bookThe Republic. Through a long dialogue between Socrates and hisyoung friends, Glaucon and Adeimantus, Plato examined why we
should be concerned about justice. The young people ask Socrates
why we should be just. They observe that people who were unjustseemed to be much better off than those whowere just. Those who twisted rules to serve theirinterests, avoided paying taxes and were willing
to lie and be deceitful, were often more successful
than those who were truthful and just. If one
were smart enough to avoid being caught then
it would seem that being unjust is better than
being just. You may have heard people

expressing similar sentiments even today. Socrates reminds these young people thatif everyone were to be unjust, if everyonemanipulated rules to suit their own interests,

no one could be sure of benefiting from injustice.Nobody would be secure and this was likely toharm all of them.  Hence, it is in our own long-

term interest to obey the laws and be just.

Socrates clarified that we need to understand
clearly what justice means in order to figure

out why it is important to be just. He explainedthat justice does not only mean doing good toour friends and harm to our enemies, or

pursuing our own interests. Justice involves the
well-being of all people. Just as a doctor isﬁThey say that to doinjustice is, by nature,
good; to suffer injustice,

evil; but that the evil is
greater than the good. And
so when men have bothdone and suffered

injustice and have hadexperience of both, notbeing able to avoid the one
and obtain the other, they
think they had betteragree among themselves
to have neither; hencethere arise laws and
mutual covenants; andthat which is ordained by
law is termed by the lawful
and just.ﬂ(Glaucon to Socrates inThe Republic).
