51Chapter 3: Election and RepresentationChapter ThreeELECTION ANDREPRESENTATIONINTRODUCTIONHave you ever played chess? What would happen if the black knight suddenlystarted moving straight rather than two and a half squares? Or, what wouldhappen if in a game of cricket, there were no umpires? In any sport, we need tofollow certain rules. Change the rules and the outcome of the game would bevery different. Similarly a game needs an impartial umpire whose decision is
accepted by all the players. The rules and the umpire have to be agreed uponbefore we begin to play a game. What is true of a game is also true of elections.There are different rules or systems of conducting elections. The outcome of theelection depends on the rules we have adopted. We need some machinery toconduct the elections in an impartial manner. Since these two decisions need to
be taken before the game of electoral politics can begin, these cannot be left toany government. That is why these basic decisions about elections are writtendown in the constitution of a democratic country.In this chapter we shall study the constitutional provisions regarding electionsand representation. We shall focus on the importance of the method of election
chosen in our Constitution and the implications of the constitutional provisionsregarding impartial machinery for conducting elections. We shall also look atsome suggestions for amending the constitutional provisions in this respect. Afterreading this chapter, you would understand:
±different methods of election;±the characteristics of the system of election adopted in our country;±the importance of the provisions for free and fair elections; and±the debate on electoral reforms.
52Indian Constitution at WorkELECTIONS AND D
EMOCRACYLet us begin by asking ourselves two simple questions about electionsand democracy.±Can we have democracy without holding elections?±Can we hold elections without having democracy?
Let us have a discussion in the classroom on both these questionsby using examples from whatever we have learnt so far in the previous
classes.The first question remindsus of the necessity ofrepresentation in a largedemocracy. All citizens cannottake direct part in making
every decision. Therefore,representatives are elected bythe people. This is how electionsbecome important.  Wheneverwe think of India as a
democracy, our mindinvariably turns to the lastelections. Elections have todaybecome the most visiblesymbol of the democraticprocess.  We often distinguish
between direct and indirectdemocracy. A directdemocracy is one where thecitizens directly participate inthe day-to-day decision-making and in the running ofthe government. The ancientcity-states in Greece wereconsidered examples of directdemocracy. Many wouldconsider local governments,
especially gram sabhas, to bethe closest examples of directThey say elections are carnival ofdemocracy. But this cartoon depicts chaosinstead. Is this true of elections always? Isit good for democracy?READ A CARTOONShankar. Copyright: Children™s Book Trust.17 February 1957
53Chapter 3: Election and Representationdemocracy. But this kind of direct democracy cannot bepracticed when a decision has to be taken by lakhs and
crores of people. That is why rule by the people usuallymeans rule by people™s representatives.In such an arrangement citizens choose theirrepresentatives who, in turn, are actively involved in
governing and administering the country. The methodfollowed to choose these representatives is referred to as
an election. Thus, the citizens have a limited role in takingmajor decisions and in running the administration. Theyare not very actively involved in making of the policies.
Citizens are involved only indirectly, through their elected
representatives. In this arrangement, where all majordecisions are taken by elected representatives, the methodby which people elect their representatives becomes very
important.The second question reminds us of the fact that notall elections are democratic. A large number of non-
democratic countries also hold elections. In fact non-democratic rulers are very keen to present themselves asdemocratic. They do so by holding election in such a way
that it does not threaten their rule. Can you think of some
examples of such non-democratic elections? What do youthink would distinguish a democratic from a non-democratic election? What can be done to ensure that
elections in a country would be conducted in ademocratic way?This is where constitution comes in. The constitutionof a democratic country lays down some basic rules about
elections. The details are usually left to be worked out bylaws passed by the legislatures. These basic rules are
usually about
±Who is eligible to vote?±Who is eligible to contest?±Who is to supervise elections?±How do the voters choose their representatives?±How are the votes to be counted and
representatives elected?What is the need of writing
these rules in the constitution?
Why can™t these be decided by
the Parliament? Or by all the
parties before every election?
54Indian Constitution at WorkLike most democratic constitutions, the Constitution of Indiaanswers all these questions. As you can see, the first three questionsare about ensuring that elections are free and fair and can thus becalled democratic. The last two questions are about ensuring a fairrepresentation. In this chapter you will consider both these aspectsof the Constitutional provisions about elections.ELECTION SYSTEM IN INDIAYou may have noted above a reference to different methods or thesystems of elections. You may have wondered what these were all
about. You may have seen or read about different methods ofelectioneering or campaigning in the elections. But what are differentmethods of elections? There is a system of conducting elections. There
are authorities and rules about do™s and don™ts. Is that what election
system is all about? You may have wondered why the constitutionneeds to write down how the votes are to be counted andrepresentatives elected. Isn™t that very obvious? People go and vote.
The candidate who gets highest votes gets elected. That is whatelections are all over the world. Why do we need to think about it?We need to, because this question is not as simple as it appearsto us. We have got so used to our system of elections that we think
that there cannot be any other way. In a democratic election, peoplevote and their preference decides who will win the contest. But thereActivityCollect newspaper clippings about elections in Indiaand any other country. Classify the clippings in the
following categories:
a.System of representationb.Voter eligibilityc.Role of the Election Commission. If you have
access to internet, visit the website of the projectElection Process Information Collection(www.epicproject.org) and collect the informationmentioned above for at least four countries.
55Chapter 3: Election and Representationcan be very different ways in which people make their choices andvery different ways in which their preferences can be counted. Thesedifferent rules of the game can make a difference to who the winner
of the game will be. Some rules can favour bigger parties; some rulescan help the smaller players. Some rules can favour the majoritycommunity, others can protect the minorities. Let us look at one
dramatic instance to see how this happens.First Past the Post SystemLook at the newspaper clipping.ActivityHold mock elections in your class to elect four classrepresentatives. Hold the election in three different ways:
±Each student can give one vote.  The four highest vote gettersare elected.±Each student has four votes and can give them all to onecandidate or split the votes among different candidates. The
four highest vote getters are elected.±Each voter gives a preference ranking to candidates and the
counting follows the method of election of Rajya Sabha
members described below.Did the same four persons win the election in each of thesemethods? If not, what was the difference? Why?
56Indian Constitution at WorkIt talks of one historic moment in India™s democracy.In the Lok Sabha elections of 1984, the Congress partycame to power winning 415 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats Œmore than 80% of the seats. Such a victory was neverachieved by any party in the Lok Sabha. What did this
election show?The Congress party won four-fifths of the seats. Doesit mean that four out of five Indian voters voted for the
Congress party? Actually not. Take a look at the enclosedtable. The Congress party got 48% of the votes. This meansthat only 48% of those who voted, voted in favour of the
candidates put up by the Congress party, but the party
still managed to win more than 80% of the seats in theLok Sabha.  Look at the performance of other parties. TheBJP got 7.4 per cent votes but less than one per cent seats.
How did that happen?Less than 50 per cent votes andmore than 80 per cent seats!
Isn™t that unfair? How could
our Constitution makers accept
such an unfair system?Votes and seats won by some major partiesin Lok Sabha Election of 1984PartyVotes (%)SeatsCongress48. 0415BJP   7.4    2Janata   6.7  10Lok Dal   5.7    3CPI (M)   5.7  22Telugu Desam   4.1  30DMK   2.3    2AIADMK   1.6  12Akali Dal   1.0    7AGP   1.0    7This happened because in our country we follow aspecial method of elections. Under this system:
±The entire country is divided into 543 constituencies;±Each constituency elects one representative; and±The candidate who secures the highest number ofvotes in that constituency is declared elected.
It is important to note that in this system whoever has
57Chapter 3: Election and Representationmore votes than all other candidates, is declared elected.The winning candidate need not secure a majority of the
votes. This method is called the First Past the Post (FPTP)system. In the electoral race, the candidate who is aheadof others, who crosses the winning post first of all, is the
winner. This method is also called the Plurality System.This is the method of election prescribed by theConstitution.Let us now go back to our example. The Congressparty won greater share of seats than its share of votes
because in many of the  constituencies in which its
candidates won, they secured less than 50% of the votes.
If there are several candidates, the winning candidate oftengets much less than 50% of the votes. The votes that go toall the losing candidates go ‚waste™, for those candidates
or parties get no seat from those votes. Suppose a partygets only 25 per cent of the votes in every constituency,but everyone else gets even less votes. In that case, the
party could win all the seats with only 25 per cent votesor even less.Proportional RepresentationLet us compare this to how elections take place in Israelthat follows a very different system of elections. In Israelonce the votes are counted, each party is allotted the share
of seats in the parliament in proportion to its share ofvotes (see Box). Each party fills its quota of seats by pickingthose many of its nominees from a preference list that has
been declared before the elections. This system of electionsis called the Proportional Representation (PR) system. Inthis system a party gets the same proportion of seats as
its proportion of votes.In the PR system there could be two variations. Insome countries, like Israel or Netherlands, the entire
country is treated as one constituency and seats are
allocated to each party according to its share of votes inthe national election. The other method is when thecountry is divided into several multi-memberThis is very confusing! How doI know who is my MP or myMLA in this system? Who
would I go to if I have any
work?
58Indian Constitution at Workconstituencies as in Argentina and Portugal. Each party prepares alist of candidates for each constituency, depending on how many
have to be elected from that constituency. In both these variations,voters exercise their preference for a party and not a candidate. Theseats in a constituency are distributed on the basis of votes polled
by a party. Thus, representatives from a constituency, would anddo belong to different parties. In India, we have adopted PR systemProportional Representation in IsraelIsrael follows proportional representation system of election. Elections to
the legislature (Knesset) take place every four years. Every party declaresa list of its candidates, but voters vote for the party and not for thecandidates.  A party gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the votes
polled by it. This allows even smaller parties with very small support baseto get representation in the legislature. (A party must get a minimum of1.5 per cent votes in order to be eligible to get seats in the legislature.)
This often leads to a multi-party coalition government.The following table shows the result of the 2003 elections to the Knesset.Based on this, you can find out what percentage of votes various parties
got in that election.Party  SeatsShare of SeatsShare of VotesLikud37Shas11National Union  7National ReligiousParty  5UTJ  5Yisrael B™Aliya  2Labour 19Shinui 15Arab parties   9Meretz   6Am Ehad   4Total Seats12058
59Chapter 3: Election and Representationon a limited scale for indirect elections. The Constitution prescribesa third and complex variation of the PR system for the election of
President, Vice President, and for the election to the Rajya Sabhaand Vidhan Parishads.Comparison of FPTP and PR system of electionFPTPPRThe country is dividedLarge geographical  areasinto small geographicalare demarcated asunits called constituenciesconstituencies. The entireor districtscountry may be a single
constituencyEvery constituency electsMore than oneone representativerepresentative may be
elected from oneconstituencyVoter votes for a candidateVoter votes for the partyA party may get more seatsEvery party gets seats in thethan votes in the legislaturelegislature in proportion tothe percentage of votesthat it getsCandidate who wins theCandidate who wins theelection may not getelections gets majority ofmajority (50%+1) votesvotes.Examples: U.K., IndiaExamples: Israel,
Netherlands
60Indian Constitution at WorkHow does PR work in Rajya Sabha electionsA third variant of PR, the Single Transferable Vote system
(STV), is followed for Rajya Sabha elections. Every Statehas a specific quota of seats in the Rajya Sabha. Themembers are elected by the respective State legislative
assemblies. The voters are the MLAs in that State. Everyvoter is required to rank candidates according to her orhis preference. To be declared the winner, a candidate
must secure a minimum quota of votes, which isdetermined by a formula:Totalvotespolled
+1
Totalnumberofcandidatestobeelected+1
For example if 4 Rajya Sabha members have to beelected by the 200 MLAs in Rajasthan, the winner would
require (200/4+1= 40+1) 41 votes. When the votes arecounted it is done on the basis of first preference votes
secured by each candidate, of which the candidate hassecured the first preference votes. If after the counting ofall first preference votes, required number of candidates
fail to fulfil the quota, the candidate who secured the
lowest votes of first preference is eliminated and his/hervotes are transferred to those who are mentioned assecond preference on those ballot papers. This process
continues till the required number of candidates aredeclared elected.Why did India adopt the FPTP system?The answer is not very difficult to guess. If you have carefully readthe box explaining the Rajya Sabha elections, you would have noticedthat it is a complicated system which may work in a small country,
but would be difficult to work in a sub-continental country like India.The reason for the popularity and success of the FPTP system is itssimplicity. The entire election system is extremely simple to
understand even for common voters who may have no specialised
61Chapter 3: Election and Representationknowledge about politics and elections.  There is also a clear choicepresented to the voters at the time of elections. Voters have to simplyendorse a candidate or a party while voting. Depending on the natureof actual politics, voters may either give greater importance to the
party or to the candidate or balance the two.  The FPTP system offers
voters a choice not simply between parties but specific candidates.
In other electoral systems, especially PR systems, voters are oftenasked to choose a party and the representatives are elected on thebasis of party lists. As a result, there is no one representative who
represents and is responsible for one locality. In constituency based
system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representative
is and can hold him or her accountable.More importantly, the makers of our Constitution also felt thatPR based election may not be suitable for giving a stable government
in a parliamentary system. We shall study the nature of parliamentary
system of executive in the next chapter. This system requires thatthe executive has majority in the legislature. You will notice that thePR system may not produce a clear majority because seats in the
legislature would be divided on the basis of share of votes. The FPTPREAD A CARTOONThese members of the ruling party are trying to listen to the‚tiny™ opposition! Was this the effect of our electoral system?Shankar. Copyright: Children™s Book Trust.29 May 1949
62Indian Constitution at Worksystem generally gives the largest party or coalition some extra bonusseats, more than their share of votes would allow. Thus this system
makes it possible for parliamentary government to function smoothly
and effectively by facilitating the formation of a stable government.Finally, the FPTP system encourages voters from different socialgroups to come together to win an election in a locality. In a diverse
country like India, a PR system would encourage each community
to form its own nation-wide party. This may also have been at the
back of the mind of our constitution makers.The experience of the working of the Constitution has confirmedthe expectation of the constitution makers. The FPTP system has
proved to be simple and familiar to ordinary voters. It has helped
larger parties to win clear majorities at the centre and the State level.
The system has also discouraged political parties that get all theirCheck your progressHere are the results of the Tamil Nadu
Assembly Election held in 1996.±What would be the composition of theAssembly if it was a PR system like in
Israel?±Which party would have a majority?±Who would form the government?±What would be the effect of this system onthe relationship of political parties?Total Seats: 234Party VotesSeatsSeats in PRsystem
DMK 42.1173AIADMK 21.5    4Congress  5.6  ŠCPI  2.1    8CPI (M)  1.7    1TMC  9.3  39PMK  3.8    4Others &
Independents 13.9    5
63Chapter 3: Election and Representationvotes only from one caste or community. Normally, the working ofthe FPTP system results in a two-party system. This means that
there are two major competitors for power and power is often shared
by these two parties alternately. It is difficult for new parties or thethird party to enter the competition and share power. In this respect,the experience of FPTP in India is slightly different. After
independence, though we adopted the FPTP system, there emerged
a one party dominance and along with it, there existed many smaller
parties. After 1989, India is witnessing the functioning of the multi-party coalitions. At the same time, gradually, in many States, a two-party competition is emerging. But the distinguishing feature of
India™s party system is that the rise of coalitions has made it possible
for new and smaller parties to enter into electoral competition in spite
of the FPTP system.RESERVATION OF CONSTITUENCIESWe have noticed that in the FPTP election system, the candidate whosecures the highest votes in a particular constituency is declaredelected. This often works to the disadvantage of the smaller socialgroups. This is even more significant in the Indian social context. We
have had a history of caste-based discrimination. In such a socialsystem, the FPTP electoral system can mean that the dominant socialgroups and castes can win everywhere and the oppressed social
groups may continue to remain unrepresented.  Our Constitutionmakers were aware of this difficulty and the need to provide a way toensure fair and just representation to the oppressed social groups.This issue was debated even before independence and the Britishgovernment had introduced ‚separate electorates™. This system meantTajamul Husain, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 333, 26 May 1949ﬁSeparate electorates have been a curse to India, havedone incalculable harm to this country– Separateelectorates have barred our progress– We (Muslims)
want to merge in the nation. ...for God™s sake keepyour hands off reservation for the Muslimcommunity.ﬂ
