RightsRightsPolitical Theory67Chapter 5RightsIn everyday life we often talk of our rights. As members of a democratic country wemay speak of such rights as the right to vote, the right to form political parties, the

right to contest elections and so on. But apart from the generally accepted political
and civil rights, people today are also making new demands for rights such as the
right to information, right to clean air or the right to safe drinking water. Rights are

claimed not only in relation to our political and public lives but also in relation toour social and personal relationships. Moreover, rights may be claimed not only for
adult human beings but also for children, unborn foetuses, and even animals. The

notion of rights is thus invoked in a variety of different ways by different people. In
this chapter we will explore:
What do we mean when we speak of rights?What is the basis on which rights are claimed?What purpose do rights serve and, why are they so important?
Overview
RightsRights68Political Theory5.1 WHAT
 ARE RIGHTS?A right is essentially an entitlement or a justified claim. It denoteswhat we are entitled to as citizens, as individuals and as human
beings. It is something that we consider to be due to us; somethingthat the rest of society must recognise as being a legitimate claim
that must be upheld. This does not mean that everything that I regard
to be necessary and desirable is a right. I may want to wear the
clothes of my choice to school rather than the prescribed uniform. I

may want to stay out late at night but this does not mean that I havea right to dress in any way I like at school or to return home when I

choose to do so. There is a distinction between what I want andthink I am entitled to, and what can be designated as rights.Rights are primarily those claims that I along with others regard
to be necessary for leading a life of respect and dignity. In fact, oneof the grounds on which rights have been claimed is that they

represent conditions that we collectively see as a source of self-

respect and dignity. For example, the right to livelihood may be
considered necessary for leading a life of dignity. Being gainfullyemployed gives a person economic independence and thus is central
for his/her dignity.  Having our basic needs met gives us freedom

to pursue our talents and interests. Or, take the right to express

ourselves freely.  This right gives us the opportunity to be creative
and original, whether it be in writing, or dance, or music, or anyother creative activity. But freedom of expression is also importantfor democratic government since it allows for the free expression of

beliefs and opinions. Rights such as the right to a livelihood, or
freedom of expression, would be important for all human beings

who live in society and they are described as universal in nature.
Another ground on which rights have been claimed is that theyare necessary for our well-being. They help individuals to develop
their talents and skills. A right like the right to education, for
instance, helps to develop our capacity to reason, gives us useful

skills and enables us to make informed choices in life. It is in this

sense that education can be designated as a universal right. However,

if an activity is injurious to our health and well-being it cannot be
RightsRightsPolitical Theory69claimed as a right. For instance, since medical research
has shown that prohibited drugs are injurious to one™shealth and since they affect our relations with others,
we cannot insist that we have a right to inhale or injectdrugs or smoke tobacco. In the case of smoking it may
even be injurious to the health of people who may be
around the smoker. Drugs may not only injure our

health but they may also sometimes change ourbehaviour patterns and make us a danger to other
people. In terms of our definition of rights, smoking or

taking banned drugs cannot be claimed as a right.5.2 WHERE DO RIGHTS COME FROM?In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, political theorists
argued that rights are given to us by nature or God. The rights ofmen were derived from natural law. This meant that rights were
not conferred by a ruler or a society, rather we are born with them.
As such these rights are inalienable and no one can take these

away from us. They identified three natural rights of man: the right

to life, liberty and property. All other rights were said to be derived

from these basic rights. The idea that we are born with certain
rights, is a very powerful notion because it implies that no state or

organisation should take away what has been given by the law of

nature. This conception of natural rights has been used widely to
oppose the exercise of arbitrary power by states and governments

and to safeguard individual freedom.
In recent years, the term human rights is being used more than
the term natural rights. This is because the idea of there being a

natural law, or a set of norms that are laid down for us by nature,

or God, appears unacceptable today. Rights are increasingly seen

as guarantees that human beings themselves seek or arrive at in
order to lead a minimally good life.
The assumption behind human rights is that all persons are
entitled to certain things simply because they are human beings.
As a human being each person is unique and equally valuable. This
means that all persons are equal and no one is born to serve 
others.Go through recent
newspapers andmake a list of people™s

movements that havemade proposals for

new kinds of rights?LET™S DO ITDo
RightsRights70Political TheoryEach of us possesses an intrinsicvalue, hence we must have equalopportunities to be free and realise
our full potential. This conception ofa free and equal self is increasingly

being used to challenge existing
inequalities based on race, caste,
religion and gender. Today, the UN
Declaration of Human Rights buildsupon this understanding of rights
and it attempts to recognise those

claims that the world community
collectively sees as being important
for leading a life of dignity and self-respect.The notion of universal humanrights has been used by oppressed
people all over the world to
challenge laws which segregate
them and deny them equalopportunities and rights. In fact, itis through the struggles of groups

that have felt excluded that the
interpretation of existing rights has

sometimes been altered. Slavery
has, for instance, been abolished,but there are other struggles that
have only had a limited success.
Even today there are communities

struggling to define humanity in a
way which includes them.The list of human rights whichpeople have claimed has expanded
over the years as societies face
new threats and challenges. For

instance, we are very conscious
    KANT ON HUMAN DIGNITYﬁ ... everything has either a price or adignity. What has a price is such thatsomething else can also be put in its placeas its equivalent; by contrast, that which
is elevated above all price, and admits of
no equivalent, has a dignity.‚Human beings™, unlike all otherobjects, possess dignity. They are, for this
reason valuable in themselves. For the
eighteenth century German philosopher,

Immanuel Kant, this simple idea had a deep
meaning. For it meant that every person
has dignity and ought to be so treated byvirtue of being a human being. A personmay be uneducated, poor or powerless. He
may even be dishonest or immoral. Yet, he

remains a human being and deserves to be

given some minimum dignity.For Kant, to treat people with dignity
was to treat them morally. This idea became

a rallying point for those struggling against
social hierarchies and for human rights.
Kant™s views represent, what is called,
the moral conception of rights. This
position rests upon two arguments. First,
we should be treating others as we wouldlike to be treated ourselves.  Second, we
should make sure that we don™t treat the

other person as means to our ends. We

should not treat people as we treat a pen,

a car, or a horse. We ought to respect
people not because they are useful to us,but because they are, after all, human

beings. That is, we should respect people
not because they are useful to us but

because they are, after all, human beings.
