220Indian Constitution at WorkChapter TenTHE PHILOSOPHY OFTHE CONSTITUTIONINTRODUCTIONIn this book, so far we have studied some important provisions of our Constitutionand the way in which these have worked in the last half century. We alsostudied the way in which the Constitution was made. But have you ever askedyourself why leaders of the national movement felt the need to adopt a constitution
after achieving independence from British rule? Why did they choose to bindthemselves and the future generations to a constitution? In this book, you haverepeatedly visited the debates in the Constituent Assembly. But it should be
asked why the study of the constitution must be accompanied by a deepexamination of the debates in the Constituent Assembly?  This question will beaddressed in this chapter. Secondly, it is important to ask what kind of aconstitution we have given ourselves. What objectives did we hope to achieveby it? Do these objectives have a moral content? If so, what precisely is it? What
are the strengths and limitations of this vision and, by implication, the achievementsand weaknesses of the Constitution? In doing so, we try to understand what canbe called the philosophy of the Constitution.After reading this chapter, you should be able to understand:±why it is important to study the philosophy of the Constitution;±what are the core features of the Indian Constitution;±what are the criticisms of this Constitution; and±what are the limitations of the Constitution?
221Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the ConstitutionWHAT IS M
EANT BY P
HILOSOPHY OF THECONSTITUTION?Some people believe that a constitution merelyconsists of laws and that laws are one thing, valuesand morality, quite another. Therefore, we can haveonly a legalistic, not a political philosophy approachto the Constitution.  It is true that all laws do nothave a moral content, but many laws are closelyconnected to our deeply held values. For example, alaw might prohibit discrimination of persons ongrounds of language or religion. Such a law isconnected to the idea of equality. Such a law exists
because we value equality. Therefore, there is aconnection between laws and moral values.We must therefore, look upon the constitution as adocument that is based on a certain moral vision. We needto adopt a political philosophy approach to the
constitution. What do we mean by a political philosophyapproach to the constitution? We have three things inmind.±First, we need to understand the conceptual structureof the constitution. What does this mean? It means
that we must ask questions like what are the possiblemeanings of terms used in the constitution such as‚rights™, ‚citizenship™, ‚minority™ or ‚democracy™?±Furthermore, we must attempt to work out a coherent
vision of society and polity conditional upon an
interpretation of the key concepts of the constitution.We must have a better grasp of the set of idealsembedded in the constitution.±Our final point is that the Indian Constitution mustbe read in conjunction with the Constituent Assembly
Debates in order to refine and raise to a highertheoretical plane, the justification of values embeddedin the Constitution.  A philosophical treatment of a
value is incomplete if a detailed justification for it isnot provided.  When the framers of the ConstitutionDoes it mean that all constitutionshave a philosophy? Or is it that
only some constitutions have a
philosophy?
222Indian Constitution at Workchose to guide Indian societyand polity by a set of values,
there must have been acorresponding set of reasons.Many of them, though, may not
have been fully explained.A political philosophy approachto the constitution is needed notonly to find out the moral contentexpressed in it and to evaluate itsclaims but possibly to use it to
arbitrate between varying
interpretations of the many corevalues in our polity. It is obviousthat many of its ideals are
challenged, discussed, debated andcontested in different politicalarenas, in the legislatures, in party
forums, in the press, in schools anduniversities. These
ideals are variously
interpreted and
sometimes wilfullymanipulated to suitpartisan short term
interests. We must,therefore, examinewhether or not a
serious disjunctionexists between theconstitutional ideal
and its expression
in other arenas.Sometimes, the sameideal is interpreted differentlyby different institutions. We needto compare these differinginterpretations. Since the expressionThe Japanese Constitutionof 1947 is popularly knownas the ‚peace constitution™.
The preamble states thatﬁWe, the Japanese peopledesire peace for all time andare deeply conscious ofthe high ideals controlling
human relationshipﬂ. Thephilosophy of the Japanese
constitution is thus basedon the ideal of peace.Article 9 of theJapanese constitution
states Š1) Aspiring sincerely to aninternational peace basedon justice and order, the
Japanese people foreverrenounce war as asovereign right of the nationand the threat or use offorce as means of settling
international disputes.2) In order to accomplishthe aim of the precedingparagraph, land, sea, andair forces, as well as other
war potential, will never bemaintained–This shows how thecontext of making theconstitution dominates the
thinking of the constitutionmakers.Yes, of course, I do remember
this issue of different
interpretations of the
Constitution. We discussed it
in the last chapter, didn™t we?
