CitizenshipCitizenshipPolitical Theory79Chapter 6CitizenshipCitizenship implies full and equal membership of a political community. In thischapter we will explore what exactly this means today. In Sections 6.2 and 6.3 wewill look at some debates and struggles which are going on regarding the interpretation
of the term ‚full and equal membership™. Section 6.4 will discuss the relationship

between citizens and the nation and the criteria of citizenship adopted in different
countries. Theories of democratic citizenship claim that citizenship should beuniversal. Does this mean that every person today should be accepted as a memberof one or other state? then How can we explain the existence of so many statelesspeople? This issue will be discussed in Section 6.5. The last section 6.6 will discussthe issue of global citizenship. Does it exist and could it replace national citizenship?After going through this chapter you should be able toexplain the meaning of citizenship, anddiscuss some of the areas in which that meaning is being expanded orchallenged today.
Overview
CitizenshipCitizenship80Political Theory6.1 INTRODUCTIONCitizenship has been defined as full andequal membership of a political community.
In the contemporary world, states provide a
collective political identity to their membersas well as certain rights. Therefore we think
of ourselves as Indians, or Japanese, or
Germans, depending on the state to which

we belong. Citizens expect certain rightsfrom their state as well as help and

protection wherever they may travel.
The importance of full membership of a state can beappreciated if we think of the condition of the thousands of people
in the world who have the bad fortune to be forced to live as
refugees or illegal migrants because no state is willing to grant
them membership. Such people are not guaranteed rights by any
state and generally live in precarious conditions. For them fullmembership of a state of their choice is a goal for which they are
willing to struggle, as we see today with Palestinian refugees in

the Middle East.The precise
nature of the
rights granted tocitizens mayvary from stateto state but inmost democratic
countries today
they would includesome politicalrights like the rightto vote, civil rights
like the freedom of speech or belief, and some socio-economic rights

which could include the right to a minimum wage, or the right to
education. Equality of rights and status is one of the basic rightsof citizenship.
CitizenshipCitizenshipPolitical Theory81Each of the rights now enjoyed by citizenshas been won after struggle. Some of the earlieststruggles were fought by people to assert their
independence and rights against powerful
monarchies. Many European countries
experienced such struggles, some of them violent,like the French Revolution in 1789. In the colonies

of Asia and Africa, demands for equal citizenship
formed part of their struggle for independence

from colonial rulers. In South Africa, the black
African population had to undertake a longstruggle against the ruling white minority for
equal citizenship. This continued until the early1990s. Struggles to achieve full membership and
equal rights continue even now in many parts of the world. You

may have read about the women™s movement and the 
dalit movementin our country. Their purpose is to change public opinion by drawing
attention to their needs as well as to influence government policy to

ensure them equal rights and opportunities.   LET™S THINKDuring seventeenth to twentieth century, white people ofEurope established their rule over the black people inSouth Africa. Read the following description about thepolicy practices in South Africa till 1994.The whites had the right to vote, contest electionsand elect government; they were free to purchase property

and go to any place in the country. Blacks did not have
such rights. Separate colonies for whites and blacks wereestablished. The blacks had to take ‚passes™ to work inwhite neighbourhoods. They were not allowed to keep their

families in the white areas. The schools were also separate
for the people of different colour.
Do you think the Blacks had full and equal membershipin the South Africa? Give reasons.What does the above description tell us about therelationship of different groups in South Africa?

CitizenshipCitizenship82Political TheoryHowever, citizenship is about more than the
relationship between states and their members. It
is also about citizen-citizen relations and involvescertain obligations of citizens to each other and tothe society. These would include not just the legal
obligations imposed by states but also a moral
obligation to participate in, and contribute to, the
shared life of the community. Citizens are also
considered to be the inheritors and trustees of theculture and natural resources of the country.
A good way to understand a political concept isto look for instances where its accepted meaning isbeing questioned by groups who feel that it does
not take account of their needs and aspirations.6.2 FULL AND EQUAL MEMBERSHIPIf you have ever travelled in a crowded
railway compartment or bus you will be
familiar with the way in which those whomay have earlier fought each other to enter,
once inside discover a shared interest inkeeping others out! A division soon
develops between ‚insiders™ and ‚outsiders™
with ‚outsiders™ being seen as a threat.
Similar processes take place from time
to time in cities, regions, or even the nation
as a while. If jobs, facilities like medicalcare or education, and natural resources
like land or water, are limited, demands may be made to restrict

entry to ‚outsiders™ even though they may be fellow citizens. You may

remember the slogan ‚Mumbai for Mumbaikars™ which expressed

such feelings. Many similar struggles have taken place in different
parts of India and the world.This raises questions about what ‚full and equal membership™really means? Does it mean that citizens should enjoy equal rightsThink of someexamples of activities
of citizens in your areaintended to helpothers, or improve the
area, or protect the
environment. List
some of the activitieswhich could beundertaken by youngpeople of your age-
group.
LET™S DO ITDo
CitizenshipCitizenshipPolitical Theory83and opportunities wherever
in the country they may
decide to live, study, orwork? Does it mean that allcitizens, rich or poor,

should enjoy certain basic
rights and facilities?In this section we willexplore the meaning of
citizenship by focusing on
the first of these questions.One of the rightsgranted to citizens in our
country, and in many
others, is freedom of

movement. This right is of
particular importance for
workers. Labour tends to
migrate in search of jobs
when opportunities are not

available near their homes.
Some people may even
travel outside the countryin search of jobs. Markets
for skilled and unskilled
workers have developed in
different parts of our

country. For instance, I.T.

workers may flock to
towns like Bangalore.
Nurses from Kerala may
be found all over the
country. The booming
building industry in town
attracts workers from

different parts of the
    MARTIN LUTHER KINGThe 1950s witnessed the emergence of CivilRights Movements against inequalities that
existed between black and white populations inmany of the southern states of the USA. Such
inequalities were maintained in these states by aset of laws called Segregation Laws through which
the black people were denied many civil and
political rights. These laws created separate areasfor coloured and white people in various civicamenities like railways, buses, theatres, housing,
hotels, restaurants, etc.
Martin Luther King Jr. was a black leader of
the movement against these laws. King gave manyarguments against the prevailing laws of

segregation. First, in terms of self-worth and
dignity every human person in the world is equalregardless of one™s race or colour. Second, King
argued that segregation is like ‚social leprosy™ on
the body politic because it inflicts deeppsychological wounds on the people who suffer
as a result of such laws.
King argued that the practice of segregationdiminishes the quality of life for the white
community also. He illustrates this point byexamples. The white community, instead ofallowing the black people to enter somecommunity parks as was directed by the court,
decided to close them. Similarly, some baseballteams had to be disbanded, as the authorities
did not want to accept black players. Thirdly, the
segregation laws create artificial boundaries
between people and prevent them from

cooperating with each other for the overall benefitof the country. For these reasons, King argued
that these laws should be abolished. He gave a
call for peaceful and non-violent resistanceagainst the segregation laws. He said in one of
his speeches: ﬁWe must not allow our creative

protest to degenerate into physical violence.ﬂ
83
