1Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?Chapter OneCONSTITUTION:WHY AND HOW?INTRODUCTIONThis book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters thatfollow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of ourConstitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government inour country and their relationship with each other.But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidentsand prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the
government and the various principles that bind the institutions of governmenthave their origin in the Constitution of India.After studying this chapter, you  will learn:±what a constitution means;±what a constitution does to the society;±how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and±what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made.
2Indian Constitution at WorkWHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION?What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does itperform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily
existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you mightthink.Constitution allows coordination andassuranceImagine yourself to be a member of areasonably large group. Further imagine that
this group has the following characteristics.The members of this group are diverse invarious ways. They have different religious
allegiances: some are Hindus, some areMuslims, some Christians and some perhapsprofess no religion at all. They are also variedin many different respects: they
pursue different professions, havedifferent abilities, have differenthobbies, different tastes in
everything from films to books.Some are rich and some are poor.Some are old, some young.
Imagine further that members ofthis group are likely to have disputes over various aspectsof life: How much property should one be allowed to own?Should it be compulsory that every child be sent to school
or should  the parents be allowed to decide? How muchshould this group spend on its safety and security? Orshould it build more parks instead? Should the group be
allowed to discriminate against some of its members?Every question will elicit a variety of answers from differentpeople. But, for all their diversity, this group has to livetogether. They are dependent upon each other in various ways. Theyrequire the cooperation of each other. What will enable the group tolive together peacefully?Yes, this could be myYes, this could be myYes, this could be myYes, this could be myYes, this could be mycolony as well! Does thiscolony as well! Does thiscolony as well! Does thiscolony as well! Does thiscolony as well! Does thisapply to your village orapply to your village orapply to your village orapply to your village orapply to your village ortown or colony too?town or colony too?town or colony too?town or colony too?town or colony too?This group is very muchThis group is very muchThis group is very muchThis group is very muchThis group is very muchlike the people of mylike the people of mylike the people of mylike the people of mylike the people of myvillage.village.
village.village.
village.
3Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?One may say that perhaps members of this group can live togetherif they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certainbasic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of somebasic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because theywould not know what members of this group could do to each other,
who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basicrules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members ofthat group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these
rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable.  Ifcitizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, theywill themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the
rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that
others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished.The first function of a constitution is to provide a set ofbasic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst
members of a society.Activity
Enact the thought experiment of this section in theclassroom. The entire class should discuss and arriveat some decisions that would apply to everyone for
this entire session. The decision could be about:
±How would the class representatives be chosen?±Which decisions will the representative be able to
take on behalf of the entire class?±Are there some decisions that the classrepresentative cannot take without consulting theentire class?±You can add any other items to this list (collectionof common kitty for the class, organisation of picnicand trips, sharing of common resources, –) as long
as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you
include those subjects that have led to anydifferences in the past.±How to revise these decisions in case youneed to?
4Indian Constitution at Work±Write down all these decisions on a paper and putit up on the notice board. Which problems did you
encounter in this decision? Were there differencesamong different students? How did you resolvethese differences? Did the entire class gain
something from this exercise?Specification of decision making powers
A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to whicha state is constituted or governed. But what should thesefundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well,
the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what
the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, butothers may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferencesshould govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to
live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best.How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what
rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to
decide?The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. Itspecifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who
gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who
gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchicalconstitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the oldSoviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in
democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide.But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that thepeople should decide, it will not answer the question: how should
the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agreeto it? Should  the people directly vote on each matter as the ancientGreeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing
representatives? But if the people act through their representatives,
how should these representatives be elected? How many should therebe?In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in mostinstances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that
Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Beforeidentifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify
5Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?who has the authority to enact it. If Parliament has the authority toenact laws,  there must be a law that bestows this authority onParliament  in the firstplace. This is the functionof the constitution. It is anauthority that constitutesgovernment in the firstplace.The second functionof a constitution is tospecify who has thepower to makedecisions in a society.It decides how thegovernment will beconstituted.Limitations on thepowers of governmentBut this is clearly notenough. Suppose you
decided who had the
authority to makedecisions. But then thisauthority passed laws that
you thought were patently
unfair. It prohibited you
from practising yourreligion for instance. Or itenjoined that clothes of a
certain colour were
prohibited, or that you
were not free to sing certain songs or that people who belonged to aparticular group (caste or religion) would always have to serve othersand would not be allowed to retain any property. Or that government
could arbitrarily arrest someone, or that only people of a certain skin
colour would be allowed to draw water from wells. You would obviously
think these laws were unjust and unfair. And even though they werepassed by a government that had come into existence basedﬁEuropean Constitutionﬂ by Patrick Chappate, International Herald Tribune, 21SEP04 Copyright Cagle Cartoons.READ A CARTOONCountries of the European Union tried to create aEuropean constitution. The attempt failed. Here is acartoonist™s impression of this attempt. Does thisalways happen in any constitution making?
