100Indian Constitution at WorkChapter FiveLEGISLATUREINTRODUCTIONYou have already studied the importance of elections and the method of electionadopted in India. Legislatures are elected by the people and work on behalf of
the people. In this chapter you would study how elected legislatures functionand help in maintaining democratic government. You will also learn about thecomposition and functioning of the parliament and State legislatures in Indiaand their importance in democratic government. After reading this chapter youwould know
±the importance of the legislature;±the functions and powers of the Parliament of India;±the law making procedure;±how the Parliament controls the executive; and±how the Parliament regulates itself.
101Chapter 5: LegislatureWHY DO WE NEED A PARLIAMENT?Legislature is not merely a law making body. Lawmaking is but oneof the functions of the legislature. It is the centre of all democratic
political process. It is packed with action; walkouts, protests,demonstration, unanimity, concern and co-operation.  All these servevery vital purposes. Indeed, a genuine democracy is inconceivable
without a representative, efficient and effective legislature. The
legislature also helps people in holding the representativesaccountable. This is indeed, the very basis of representativedemocracy.Yet, in most democracies, legislatures are losing central place tothe executive. In India too, the Cabinet initiates policies, sets the
agenda for governance and carries them through. This has led some
critics to remark that the Parliament has declined. But even verystrong cabinets must retain majority in the legislature. A strong leaderhas to face the Parliament and answer to the satisfaction of the
Parliament. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Parliament. It
is recognised as one of the most democratic and open forum of debate.On account of its composition, it is the most representative of allorgans of government. It is above all, vested with the power to choose
and dismiss the government.Activity
Consider these newspaper reports and then think:
what would happen if there were no legislatures?After reading each news report, state how thelegislature succeeded or failed in  maintaining
control over the executive.l28th February 2002: The Union FinanceMinister, Jaswant Singh, announced in theUnion budget proposal an increase of  Rs. 12in the price of a 50 kg bag of urea and a smallerincrease in the price of two other fertilizers which
constituted about 5 per cent rise in prices. The
current urea price of Rs. 4,830 a tonne carriesa subsidy of as much as 80 per cent.
102Indian Constitution at WorkWHY DO WE NEED TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT?The term ‚Parliament™ refers to the national legislature. The legislatureof the States is described as State legislature. The Parliament in India
has two houses. When there are two houses of the legislature, it iscalled a bicameral legislature. The two Houses of the IndianParliament are the Council of States or the Rajya Sabha and the
House of the People or the Lok Sabha. The Constitution has given
the States the option of establishing either a unicameral or bicamerallegislature. At present only seven States have a bicameral legislature.l11 March 2002. The Finance Minister had to
roll back the increases in fertilizer prices
under intense opposition pressure (The Hindu,12 March 2002)lOn 4 June 1998, the Lok Sabha witnessed
acrimonious scenes over the hike in urea and
petroleum process. The entire opposition
staged a walkout. The issue rocked the housefor two days leading to walkout by opposition.The finance minister in his budget proposal had
proposed a hike of 50 paisa per kilogram of
urea to reduce subsidy on it. This forced the
finance minister Mr. Yashwant Sinha to roll
back the hike in urea prices ( Hindustan Times,4 and 5 June 1998)l22 February 1983: In a rare move, the LokSabha today unanimously decided to suspend
official business and give precedence to debateon Assam. Home Minister P.C.Sethi made astatement ﬁI seek the cooperation of all members
whatever their views and policies, in promoting
harmony among different communities and
groups living in Assam. What is needed now is
not acrimony but  a healing touch.ﬂ (HindustanTimes, 22 February 1983)lCongress Members voiced protest against
atrocities on Harijans in Andhra Pradesh (TheHindu, 3 March 1985)
