DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory143Chapter 10DevelopmentOverviewIn this chapter, we will start with the common understanding of development
and the problems presented by this understanding. In the later sections™ we will
explore the ways in which these problems can be addressed and discuss somealternative ways of thinking about development. After going through this chapteryou should be able toexplain the meaning of the term development.discuss the achievements and problems of existing models of development.discuss some of the alternative models of development which have been putforward.
DevelopmentDevelopment144Political Theory10.1 INTRODUCTIONSuppose in a school each class brings out an annual class magazineas one of their extra-curricular activities. In one class, the teacher takes
the last year™s magazine as a model, makes a plan of what this year™smagazine should contain in terms of topics, articles, poetry, etc. and
then divides and assigns topics to different students. It is possiblethat as a result a student interested in cricket may find that she has
been allotted a different topic and the one who has been allotted cricket
is actually keen to write a play. It is also possible that in this schemethree students may want to get together to work out a series of cartoons
but find that they have been placed in different groups. In anotherclass, however, the content of the magazine is debated by the students.
There are many disagreements but eventually a plan for a magazine
emerges about which all are in agreement.In your opinion, which class will come up with a magazine inwhich the students get to realise their particular interests in the bestpossible manner? The first may produce a good-looking magazinebut will the content be engrossing? Will the person who wants towrite on cricket, write with equal passion on her assigned topic?
Which magazine will be seen as unique and which as standard?
Which class will feel that working on the magazine was interesting
and which class will do it as just routine homework?For a society, deciding about what constitutes development is abit like students deciding about what kind of school magazine they
want and how they should work on it. We could mechanically follow

a model which has been previously used in our own, or other
countries, or we could plan keeping in mind the good of the society
as a whole as well as the rights of those people whose lives may be
directly affected by development projects. The leaders can eitherconcentrate on implementing plans regardless of protests or theycan proceed democratically, carrying the people with them.In the broadest sense of the term, development conveys the ideasof improvement, progress, well-being and an aspiration for a better
life.  Through its notion of development a society articulates what
constitutes its vision for the society as a whole and how best to achieve
DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory145it. However, the term development is also often used in a narrower
sense to refer to more limited goals such as increasing the rate ofeconomic growth, or modernising the society. Development hasunfortunately often come to be identified with achieving pre-settargets, or completing projects like dams, or factories, hospitals,
rather than with realising the broader vision of development which
the society upholds. In the process some sections of society may
have benefited while others may have had to suffer loss of their homes,or lands, or way of life, without any compensatory gains. Issues such as whether the rights of people have been respectedin the course of development, whether the benefits and burdens ofdevelopment have been justly distributed, or whether decisionsregarding development priorities have been democratically made,have been raised in many countries. Hence, development has become
the subject of considerable controversy today. The models of
development which have been adopted in different countries have
become the subject of debate and criticism and alternative models
have been put forward. In such a situation the broaderunderstanding of development can serve as a standard by which thedevelopment experience of a country is examined.10.2 THE CHALLENGE OF DEVELOPMENTThe concept of development gained importance after the second halfof the twentieth century. This was the time when a large number ofcountries in Asia and Africa gained political independence. Most wereimpoverished and their populations had a low standard of living.Education, health and other facilities were poor. They were often

described as ‚underdeveloped™ or ‚developing™. The comparison was
with the richer countries in Western Europe and the United States.
In the 1950s and 1960s when most countries of Asia and Africahad achieved independence from colonial rule, the most urgent taskin front of them was to solve the pressing problems of poverty,
malnourishment, unemployment, illiteracy and the lack of basic
amenities that a majority of their populations faced. They arguedthat the reason why they were backward was because under colonial
rule their resources had been used not for their own benefit but for
DevelopmentDevelopment146Political Theorythe benefit of their colonial masters.  With Independence, they couldreorganise their resources in the best possible manner to serve theirnational interests. Therefore it was now possible for them to formulatesuch policies which would allow them to overcome theirbackwardness and move towards achieving the standards of their
former colonial masters. This provided the impetus for these
countries to undertake development projects.The concept of development hasundergone many changes over theyears. In the initial years the focus
was on catching up with the west
in terms of economic growth andmodernisation of  societies. Developing
countries adopted goals likefaster economic growth throughindustrialisation, modernisation of
agriculture and extending and
modernising education. It was believed
at the time that the state was the only
agency capable of initiating this kindof social and economic change. Manycountries embarked upon ambitious
projects of development, often with the
help of loans and aid from the
developed countries.In India a series of Five Year Plans for development were made
starting from the 1950s, and these included a number of mega
projects such as the Bhakra Nangal Dam, setting up steel plants in
different parts of the country, mining, fertilizer production and
improving agricultural techniques. It was hoped that a multi-
pronged strategy would have an impact on the economy and
significantly increase the wealth of the country. It was also hopedthat the emerging prosperity would gradually ‚trickle down™ to thepoorest sections of society and help to reduce inequality. A great
deal of faith was placed in adopting the latest discoveries of science
and state of the art technologies. New educational institutions like
the Indian Institutes of Technology were set up and collaborationIf this project comes up we will be finished!R. K. Laxman in the Times of  India
DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory147with advanced countries in order to have access to their knowledgebecame a top priority. It was believed that the process of developmentwould make the society more modern and forward looking and set iton the path of growth.However, the model of development adopted by India and other
countries has come under a great deal of criticism over the yearsand this has led to some rethinking about the goals and processes of
development today.10.3 CRITICISMS OF DEVELOPMENT MODELSCritics of development have pointed out that the kindof development models which have been adopted in
many countries has proved very costly for the
developing countries. The financial costs have beenenormous, putting many countries into long-termdebt. Africa is still suffering from the enormous debts
which it ran up by borrowings from the richer countries.The gains in terms of growth have not been
commensurate and poverty and disease continue to
plague the continent.The Social Costs of DevelopmentThis model of development has also had high social costs.A large number of people have been displaced from their
homes and localities due to the construction of big dams,industrial activities and mining activities, or otherprojects. Displacement results in loss of livelihood and
increases impoverishment. If rural agriculturalcommunities are displaced from their traditional occupations andregions they end up at the margins of society, swelling the largenumber of urban and rural poor. Traditional skills acquired over an

extended period may be lost. There is also a loss of culture because
when people are relocated they lose a whole way of community life.
Such displacement has led to struggles in many countries.Displaced people have not always accepted their fate passively.You may have heard about the ‚Narmada Bachao Andolan™ which
Is any majordevelopmental project(e.g. building of dam,road, rail or industry
etc.) taking place inyour area?  Has therebeen any protest or
complaint against that
project? What issueshave been raisedby the protesters?
What is the response ofthe government tothese issues? Meetsome protesters andgovernment officials tofind out their versions.LET™S DO ITDo
DevelopmentDevelopment148Political Theoryhas been leading a movement against the Sardar Sarovar Dam onthe river Narmada for many years. The supporters of this big damclaim that it will generate electricity, help irrigate large areas of landand also provide drinking water to the desert areas of Kutch andSaurashtra. The opponents of the dam dispute these claims. They
claim that almost one million people have displaced. They have lost
their lands through submergence, or construction, and consequently
lost their livelihood. Most of these people belong to the tribal anddalit communities who constitute some of the most under-privileged
groups in the country. Some even argue that the dam would greatlyupset the ecological balance submerging large tracts of forests.Environmental Costs of DevelopmentDevelopment has indeed caused a high degree of environmentaldegradation in many countries and not just the displaced people
but all of the population is beginning to feel the consequences. Whenthe ‚tsunami™ hit the South and South-East Asian coasts last year itwas observed that the destruction of mangroves and the building of
commercial enterprises along the shore line was the reason for the
greater extent of the damage caused. You must have read about

global warming. The ice in the Arctic and Antarctic is melting becauseof increased emission of green house gases into the atmosphere andthis has the potential to cause floods and actually submerge lowlying areas like Bangladesh and the Maldives.In the long term the ecological crisis will adversely affect all of us.Air pollution is already a problem which does not discriminatebetween the rich and the poor.  But in the short term, indiscriminate

use of resources tends to adversely affect the under-privileged more
sharply. Loss of forests affects the poor who use forest resources fora variety of subsistence needs like firewood, medicinal herbs or food.
Drying up of rivers and ponds and falling ground water levels means
that women have to walk longer in order to procure water.
The model of development we are pursuing is heavily dependenton the increasing use of energy. Most of the energy currentlygenerated in the world is from non-renewable sources like coal orpetroleum. Large tracts of the Amazon rainforests are being
deforested in order to provide for the increased consumer needs.
DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory149     KEN SARO-WIWA
Just imagine that a hidden treasure isfound in your backyard. How will youfeel if the treasure is taken away littleby little by authorities in the name ofdevelopment? This development is notreflected in your standard of living or
even in facilities for the colony you stayin. Further, your house as a site for the
treasure is constantly vandalised by
people who claim to use the treasurefor development. Isn™t it gross injusticefor the people in whose house the
treasure has been unearthed?Oil had been found in the region ofOgoni in Nigeria in 1950s which
resulted in crude oil exploration. Soon economic growth andbig business created around it an entangled web of politicalintrigues, environmental problems and corruption. This
prevented development of the very region where oil had beenfound.Ken Saro-Wiwa, an Ogoni by birth, was recognised as anauthor, journalist and television producer in the 1980s. In

his work, he observed and reacted to the exploitation aroundhim as the oil and gas industry took riches from beneath the
feet of the poor Ogoni farmers, and in return left the landpolluted and the people disenfranchised.Saro-Wiwa led a non-violent struggle with the launch ofthe Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP) in
1990 Š an open, grassroots community-based politicalmovement. The movement was so effective, that by 1993 the
oil companies had to pull out of Ogoni. But Saro-Wiwa paidthe price for this. The military rulers of Nigeria framed him ina murder case and the military tribunal sentenced him to
death. Saro-Wiwa said that the military rulers were doing thison behest of Shell, the multi-national oil company that had towithdraw from the Ogoni region. Human rights organisations
all over the world protested against this trial and appealed forhis release. Ignoring this world-wide protest, the Nigerianrulers executed Ken Saro-Wiwa in 1995.
DevelopmentDevelopment150Political TheoryAre there enough of these non-renewable resources which canallow not only the advancedcountries but all people in the
world to enjoy an affluent life
style? Given the finite nature of
these resources, the answer would
be no. What about the futuregenerations? Are we going to handover a depleted earth and multipleproblems to them?Assessing DevelopmentIt could not of course be said thatdevelopment has had only
negative effects for the world. Somecountries have had some successin increasing their rate ofeconomic growth and even inreducing poverty. But over all,
inequalities have not beenseriously reduced and poverty
continues to be a problem in the
developing world. As we sawearlier, it was assumed that the
benefits of growth would trickledown to the poorest and mostunprivileged sections of the
society and thereby raise the
standards of living of all. Howeverthe world over, the gap between the
rich and the poor has been
widening. A country may have
high rates of growth but that
doesn™t necessarily translate intoa fair distribution of its benefits. When economic growth andredistribution do not go together the benefits are likely to becornered by those who are already privileged.   ENVIRONMENTALISM
You must have often heard terms like
pollution, waste management,sustainable development, protection of
endangered species and global warming.These are the buzz words of theenvironmental movement which works to
protect natural resources and eco-systems. Environmentalists maintainthat human beings should learn to live
in harmony with the rhythms of the eco-system and not manipulate the naturalenvironment to serve their immediate
interests. They believe that mankind isusing up and destroying naturalresources to such an extent that we will
bequeath only a barren earth, poisonedrivers and polluted air to futuregenerations.The roots of environmentalism canbe traced back to the nineteenth centuryrevolt against industrialisation. Today,the environmental movement hasbecome a world-wide phenomenon withthousands of non-governmental groupsand even some ‚green™ political parties.Some well-known environmental groupsinclude Green Peace and the World

Wildlife Fund and in India we have theChipko Movement which emerged toprotect the Himalayan forests.  Such

groups try to pressurise governments tomodify their industrial anddevelopmental policies in the light of
environmental goals.
DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory151It is now increasingly being recognised that there is a need toadopt a broader notion of development. An excessive focus oneconomic growth has not only given rise to a wide range of problemsbut even economic growth has not always been satisfactory. Hence,
development is now being viewed in broader terms as a process which
should improve the quality of life of all the people.If development is understood as a process which aims to improvethe quality of life of people, it could be argued that measuring the rateof economic growth alone would be an inadequate and at timesmisleading indicator of development. There is now a search for
alternative ways of measuring development. One such attempt is the
Human Development Report which is annually brought out by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). This report ranks
countries on the basis of their performance in social indicators likeliteracy and education levels, life expectancy and maternal mortalityrates. This measure is called the Human Development Index. According
to this conception development should be a process which allows more
and more people to make meaningful choices and the pre-condition
for this is the fulfilment of basic needs like food, education, health and
shelter. This is called the basic needs approach. Popular slogans like
‚roti, kapda aur makaan™, ‚garibi hatao™ or ‚bijli, sadak, pani™ conveythe sentiment that without the fulfilment of basic needs, it is impossiblefor an individual to live a dignified life and pursue her desires. Freedom
from want or deprivation is the key to effectively exercising one™s choices
and pursuing one™s desires. In this view, if people die of starvation orcold due to lack of food and shelter, or if children are working instead
of being in school, this is indicative of a state of under-development.
  L
ET™S THINKGather information (news reports, articles,charts, tables) about the HumanDevelopment Index from the latest Human Development Report availableto you. Form different groups in the class and have each group make a
presentation on the following:India™s changing HDI rank.India™s rank compared to its neighbours.Different components of the HDI and India™s score on each.Compare HDI data for India  with figures for economic growth
of the country.151
DevelopmentDevelopment152Political Theory10.4 ALTERNATIVE
 CONCEPTIONS OF DEVELOPMENTIn the preceding sections we discussed some of the limitations of themodel of development pursued so far. There have been huge

costs Š both human and environmental Š of development policiesand the costs and benefits of development have been unequallydistributed among people. Further, the strategies of development
adopted in most countries have been ‚top-down™, that is, the selection
of development priorities and strategies and the actual implementation
of projects were all generally decided by the higher levels of the politicalleadership and bureaucracy. There was often little consultation with
the people whose lives would be most immediately affected bydevelopment projects. Neither was their experience and the knowledgeacquired over centuries utilized nor were their intereststaken into account. This was as true of democratic
countries as of dictatorial ones. Development thusbecame a process designed and implemented by the
ruling sections in the country who have also often beenthe major beneficiaries of development projects. This hasunderscored the need to think of alternative ways of
understanding and pursuing development which are
equitable and sustainable.  Issues of rights, equality,
freedom, justice and democracy have all been raised in
the process. In this section, we shall examine how these
concepts have taken on newer meanings in the contextof the development debate.Right Claims
We have noted how the benefits of development have been largely
cornered by the powerful and the costs of the development model
have been borne by the poorest and vulnerable sections of thepopulation whether due to ecological degradation or due todisplacement and loss of livelihood. One of the issues which has beenraised is regarding the protections that affected people can claim
from the State and the society as a whole. In a democracy do people
have a right be consulted in decisions which directly affect their lives?Do they have a right to livelihood which they can claim when anMake a list of the kindof things that weregularly discard.Think about how we
could recycle or reusethem to reduce theamount of harmful
waste.LET™S DO ITDo
DevelopmentDevelopmentPolitical Theory153activity sanctioned by the government threatens theirsource of livelihood?  Another issue is regarding rightsto natural resources. Can communities claim traditionalrights to the use of natural resources? This particularlyapplies to tribal and aboriginal communities who have
a specific way of community life and relationship to the
environment.The crucial issue here is to whom do naturalresources belong? Is it the local community, the stateconcerned, or are they a common resource of all
humanity? If we understand resources as common to
humanity then humanity would include futuregenerations as well. Negotiating the competing demands
of different sections of a population as well as achievinga balance between the claims of the present and futureis the task of democracies.Democratic Participation
How many times have you been told that you must do somethingŠ say,
obey your parents or teachers Š for your own good? And have you

felt like saying, if it is good for me, please let me decide that myself?The distinction between democracy and dictatorship is that in ademocracy conflicts over resources, or different visions of the goodlife, are resolved through debate and a respect for the rights of all and
these cannot be imposed from above. Thus, if everyone in a society

has a common stake in achieving a better life, then everyone needs tobe involved in formulating the goals of development and in devising
ways of implementing it. There is a difference between following a planmade by others and sharing in the formulation of the plans. Firstly,even if others make plans with the best intentions, they are likely to be
less aware than you about your specific needs. Secondly, being an
active part of the decision-making process is empowering.Both democracy and development are concerned with realisingthe common good. By what process can the common good bedefined?  In democratic countries the right of people to participate indecision making is emphasised. One of the ways which has beenThe rivers belong tothe people and not tothe government;
therefore anydecision about riverwater should not be
taken withoutpeople™s approvalLET™S DEBATEﬁ ﬂ
