NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory97Chapter 7NationalismOverviewThis chapter will introduce and discuss the ideas of nationalism and nation. Our
concern will be not so much to understand why nationalism has arisen, or what
functions it serves; rather our concern would be to think carefully about nationalism
and assess its claims and aspirations. After studying this chapter you should beable to:understand the concepts of nation and nationalism.acknowledge the strengths and limitations of nationalism.
appreciate the need for ensuring a link between democracy and nationalism.

NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory987.1 INTRODUCING NATIONALISM
If we were to take a quick poll of what people commonly understandby the term nationalism we are likely to get responses which talk

about patriotism, national flags, sacrificing for the country, and thelike. The Republic Day parade in Delhi is a striking symbol of Indiannationalism and it brings out the sense of power, strength, as well as
diversity which many associate with the Indian nation. But if we try
to go deeper we will find that it is difficult to arrive at a precise and

widely accepted definition of the term nationalism. This need not
mean that we should abandon the effort.  Nationalism needs to be

studied because it plays such an important role in world affairs.
During the last two centuries or more, nationalism has emerged
as one of the most compelling of political creeds which has helped to
shape history. It has inspired intense loyalties as well as deep hatreds.

It has united people as well as divided them, helped to liberate them
from oppressive rule as well as been the cause of conflict and

bitterness and wars. It has been a factor in the break up of empires
and states. Nationalist struggles have contributed to the drawingand redrawing of the boundaries of states and empires. At present a

large part of the world is divided into different nation-states although

the process of re-ordering of state boundaries has not come to an

end and separatist struggles within existing states are common.Nationalism has passed through many phases. For instance, in
the nineteenth century Europe, it led to the unification of a number

of small kingdoms into larger nation-states. The present day German
and Italian states were formed through such a process of unification
and consolidation. A large number of new states were also founded

in Latin America. Along with the consolidation of state boundaries,
local dialects and local loyalties were also gradually consolidated intostate loyalties and common languages. The people of the new statesacquired a new political identity which was based on membership of
the nation-state. We have seen a similar process of consolidation

taking place in our own country in the last century or more.
 But nationalism also accompanied and contributed to the break
up of large empires such as the Austro-Hungarian and Russian

NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory99empires in the early twentieth century in Europe as well as the
break up of the British, French, Dutch and Portuguese empires in
Asia and Africa. The struggle for freedom from colonial rule by India
and other former colonies were nationalist struggles, inspired by
the desire to establish nation-states which would be independent
of foreign control.
The process of redrawing state boundaries continues to take
place. Since 1960, even apparently stable nation-states have beenconfronted by nationalist demands put forward by groups or regions
and these may include demands for separate statehood. Today, in

many parts of the world we witness nationalist struggles that
threaten to divide existing states. Such separatist movements have

developed among the Quebecois in Canada, the Basques in northern
Spain, the Kurds in Turkey and Iraq, and the Tamils in Sri Lanka,
among others. The language of nationalism is also used by somegroups in India. Arab nationalism today may hope to unite Arab

countries in a pan Arab union but separatist movements like the
Basques or Kurds struggle to divide existing states.We may all agree that nationalism is a powerful force in the
world even today. But it is more difficult to arrive at agreement
regarding the definition of terms like nation or nationalism. What
is a nation? Why do people form nations and to what do nations

aspire? Why are people ready to sacrifice and even die for their

nation? Why, and in what way, are claims to nationhood linked to
claims to statehood? Do nations have a right to statehood or national
self-determination? Or can the claims of nationalism be met without
conceding separate statehood? In this chapter we will explore some
of these issues.In this age of globalisation, the worldis shrinking. We are living in a global

village. Nations are irrelevant.
That™s not the case. Nationalism is stillrelevant.  You can see this when Indian

team goes out to play cricket. Or whenyou discover that Indians living abroad

still watch Bollywood films.99
NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory1007.2  NATIONS
 AND NATIONALISM
A nation is not any casual collection of people. At the same time itis also different from other groups or communities found in human

society. It is different from the family which is based on face-to-face
relationships with each member having direct personal knowledge
of the identity and character of others. It is also different from tribes
and clans and other kinship groups in which ties of marriage and

descent link members to each other so that even if we do not
personally know all the members we can, if need be, trace the linksthat bind them to us. But as a member of a nation we may never
come face to face with most of our fellow nationals nor need weshare ties of descent with them. Yet nations exist, are lived in and
valued by their members.It is commonly believed that nations are constituted by a group
who share certain features such as descent, or language, or religion
or ethnicity. But there is in fact no common set of characteristics

which is present in all nations. Many nations do not have a common
language, Canada is an example here. Canada includes Englishspeaking as well as French speaking peoples. India also has a large
number of languages which are spoken
in different regions and by different

communities. Nor do many nations have
a common religion to unite them. Thesame could be said of othercharacteristics such as race or descent.What then constitutes a nation? Anation is to a great extent an ‚imagined™
community, held together by the
collective beliefs, aspirations andimaginations of its members. It is basedon certain assumptions which people
make about the collective whole with
which they identify. Let us identify and
understand some of the assumptions
which people make about the nation.Identify any patrioticsong in your language.
How is the nationdescribed in this song?Identify and watch
any patriotic filmsin your language. Howhas nationalism been
portrayed and itscomplexities workedout in these films?LET™S DO ITDo
NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory101Shared BeliefsFirst, a nation is constituted by belief. Nations are not likemountains, rivers or buildings which we can see and feel. They are
not things which exist independent of the beliefs that people haveabout them. To speak of a people as a nation is not to make a
comment about their physical characteristics or behaviour. Rather,

it is to refer to the collective identity and vision for the future of a

group which aspires to have an independent political existence. To

this extent, nations can be compared with a team. When we speak
of a team, we mean a set of people who work or play together and,more importantly, conceive of themselves as a collective group. If

they did not think of themselves in this way they would cease to be
a team and be simply different individuals playing a game or

undertaking a task. A nation exists when its members believe that
they belong together.
Why dont you cheer for our team?
Dont you have any nationalist spirit?
I am as much a nationalist as anyoneelse. I cast my vote; I pay my taxes and I
respect the laws of our country. I am also

proud to belong to this country.
HistorySecond, people who see themselves as a nation also embody a senseof continuing historical identity. That is, nations perceive themselves
as stretching back into the past as well as reaching into the future.
They articulate for themselves a sense of their own history by drawingon collective memories, legends, historical records, to outline the

continuing identity of the nation. Thus nationalists in India invokedits ancient civilisation and cultural heritage and other achievementsto claim that India has had a long and continuing history as acivilisation and that this civilisational continuity and unity is the
basis of the Indian nation. Jawaharlal Nehru, for instance, wrote in

NationalismNationalismPolitical Theory102his book The Discovery of India, ﬁThough outwardly there was diversity
and infinite variety among the people, everywhere there was that
tremendous impress of oneness, which held all of us together in
ages past, whatever political fate or misfortune had befallen usﬂ.Territory
Third, nations identify with a particular territory. Sharing a commonpast and living together on a particular territory over a long period
of time gives people a sense of their collective identity. It helpsthem to imagine themselves as one people. It is therefore not
surprising that people who see themselves as a nation speak of ahomeland. The territory they occupied and the land on which they
have lived has a special significance for them, and they claim it as
their own. Nations however characterise the homeland in different
ways, for instance as motherland, or fatherland, or holy land. The
Jewish people for instance, in spite of being dispersed and scattered
in different parts of the world always claimed that their original
homeland was in Palestine, the ‚promised land™. The Indian nation

identifies with the rivers, mountains and regions of the Indian
subcontinent. However, since more than one set of people may lay
claim to the same territory, the aspiration for a homeland has been
a major cause of conflict in the world.Shared Political IdealsFourth, while territory and shared historical identity play an importantrole in creating a sense of oneness, it is a shared vision of the future

and the collective aspiration to have an independent political existencethat distinguishes groups from nations. Members of a nation share
a vision of the kind of state they want to build. They affirm among

other things a set of values and principles such as democracy,secularism and liberalism. These ideals represent the terms under
which they come together and are willing to live together. It represents,
in other words, their political identity as a nation.In a democracy, it is shared commitment to a set of politicalvalues and ideals that is the most desirable basis of a political
community or a nation-state. Within it, members of political
community are bound by a set of obligations. These obligations
