196Indian Constitution at WorkChapter NineCONSTITUTION AS ALIVING DOCUMENTINTRODUCTIONIn this chapter, you will see how the Constitution has worked in the last fifty-five years and how India has managed to be governed by the same Constitution.After studying this chapter you will find out that:±the Indian Constitution can be amended according to the needs of the time;±though many such amendments have already taken place, the Constitutionhas remained intact and its basic premises have not changed;±the judiciary has played an important role in protecting the Constitution and
also in interpreting the Constitution; and±the Constitution is a document that keeps evolving and responding to changingsituations.
197Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living DocumentARE CONSTITUTIONS STATIC?It is not uncommon for nations to rewritetheir constitutions in response to changed
circumstances or change of ideas withinthe society or even due to politicalupheavals. The Soviet Union had four
constitutions in its life of 74 years (1918,
1924, 1936 and 1977). In 1991, the rule
of the Communist Party of Soviet Unioncame to an end and soon the Sovietfederation disintegrated. After this political
upheaval, the newly formed Russian
federation adopted a new constitution in
1993.But look at India. The Constitution ofIndia was adopted on 26 November 1949.
Its implementation formally started from
26 January 1950. More than fifty-five
years after that, the same constitutioncontinues to function as the frameworkwithin which the government of our
country operates.Is it that our Constitution is so goodthat it needs no change? Was it that ourConstitution makers were so farsightedand wise that they had foreseen all the
changes that would take place in the
future? In some sense both the answers
are correct. It is true that we have inheriteda very robust Constitution. The basicframework of the Constitution is very
much suited to our country. It is also true
that the Constitution makers were very
farsighted and provided for manysolutions for future situations. But noconstitution can provide for all
eventualities. No document can be such
that it needs no change.France had numerousconstitutions in the lasttwo centuries. After therevolution and during the
Napoleonic period, Franceunderwent continuousexperimentation about aconstitution: The post-revolution constitution of
1793 is called theperiod of the firstFrench republic. Thencommenced the secondFrench republic in 1848.
The third French republicwas formed with a newconstitution in 1875. In1946, with a newconstitution, the fourth
French republic came intobeing. Finally, in 1958, thefifth French republiccame into being with yetanother constitution.It seems to me thatconstitutional changes are very
closely linked to political
developments.
198Indian Constitution at WorkThen how does the same Constitution continue toserve the country? One of the answers to such questionsis that our Constitution accepts the necessity ofmodifications according to changing needs of the society.Secondly, in the actual working of the Constitution, there
has been enough flexibility of interpretations. Bothpolitical practice and judicial rulings have shown maturityand flexibility in implementing the Constitution. These
factors have made our Constitution a living document
rather than a closed and static rulebook.In any society, those responsible for drafting theconstitution at a particular time would face one common
challenge: the provisions of the constitution wouldnaturally reflect efforts to tackle the problems that thesociety is facing at the time of making of the constitution.
At the same time, the constitution must be a documentthat provides the framework of the government for thefuture as well. Therefore, the constitution has to be able
to respond to the challenges that may arise in the future.
In this sense, the constitution will always have somethingthat is contemporary and something that has a moredurable importance.At the same time, a constitution is not a frozen andunalterable document. It is a document made by human
beings and may need revisions, changes and re-
examination. It is true that the constitution reflects thedreams and aspirations of the concerned society. It mustalso be kept in mind that the constitution is a framework
for the democratic governance of the society. In this sense,
it is an instrument that societies create for themselves.This dual role of the constitution always leads todifficult questions about the status of the constitution: is
it so sacred that nobody ever can change it? Alternatively,is it so ordinary an instrument that it can be modifiedjust like any other ordinary law?The makers of the Indian Constitution were aware ofthis problem and sought to strike a balance. They placed
the Constitution above ordinary law and expected thatI know that the Constitutionof  the US came into existence
more than 200 years ago and so
far it has been amended only 27
times! Isn™t that very interesting?
199Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Documentthe future generations will respect this document. At the same time,they recognised that in the future, this document may require
modifications. Even at the time of writing the Constitution, they wereaware that on many matters there were differences of opinion.Whenever society would veer toward any particular opinion, a change
in the constitutional provisions would be required. Thus, the IndianConstitution is a combination of both the approaches mentionedabove: that the constitution is a sacred document and that it is an
instrument that may require changes from time to time.  In otherwords, our Constitution is not a static document, it is not the finalword about everything; it is not unalterable.Check your progress
After reading the section above, a number of
students in the class were confused. They made thefollowing statements. What would you say abouteach of these statements?
±The Constitution is like any other law. It simplytells us what are the rules and regulationsgoverning the government.±The  Constitution is the expression of the will ofthe people, so there must be a provision to changethe Constitution after every ten or fifteen years.±The  Constitution is a statement of the philosophy
of the country. It can never be changed.±The  Constitution is a sacred document.
Therefore any talk of changing it is against
democracy.HOW TO AMEND THE CONSTITUTION?Article 368:
–Parliament may in exercise ofits constituent power amend byway of addition, variation or
repeal any provision of thisConstitution in accordance withthe procedure laid down in this
article.
200Indian Constitution at WorkWe have already seen that the makers of ourConstitution wanted to strike a balance. The Constitutionmust be amended if so required. But it must be protectedfrom unnecessary and frequent changes. In other words,they wanted the Constitution to be ‚flexible™ and at the
same time ‚rigid™. Flexible means open to changes andrigid means resistant to changes. A constitution that canbe very easily changed or modified is often called flexible.
In the case of constitutions, which are very difficultto amend, they are described as rigid. The IndianConstitution combines both these characteristics.The makers of the Constitution were aware of the factthat there may be some faults or mistakes in theConstitution; they knew that the Constitution could notbe totally free of errors. Whenever such mistakes would
come to light, they wanted the Constitution to be easilyamended and to be able to get rid of these mistakes. Thenthere were some provisions in the Constitution that were
of temporary nature and it was decided that these couldbe altered later on once the new Parliament was elected.But at the same time, the Constitution was framing a
federal polity and therefore, the rights and powers of the
States could not be changed without the consent of theStates. Some other features were so central to the spirit ofthe Constitution that the Constitution makers were
anxious to protect these from change. These provisionshad to be made rigid. These considerations led to differentways of amending the Constitution.I don™t understand how aconstitution can be flexible or
rigid. Isn™t it the politics of that
period which makes the
constitution rigid or flexible?How to amend theConstitutionSimilar to ordinarylaw: simple majorityin Parliament: asmentioned in somearticlesSpecial majority inParliament in bothHouses separately:
as per article 368Special majority+Legislatures of halfthe states: article368
201Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living DocumentThere are many articles in the Constitution, whichmention that these articles can be amended by a simplelaw of the Parliament. No special procedure for amendmentis required in such cases and there is no difference at allbetween an amendment and an ordinary law. These parts
of the Constitution are very flexible. Read carefully thefollowing text of some articles of the Constitution. In boththese articles, the wording ‚by law™ indicates that thesearticles can be modified by the Parliament withoutrecourse to the procedure laid down in Article 368. Manyother articles of the Constitution can be modified by the
Parliament in this simple manner.Article 2: Parliament
may by law admit intothe union –..newstates–.Article 3: Parliamentmay by law–  b) increasethe area of any state–.For amending the remaining parts of the Constitution,provision has been made in Article 368 of the Constitution.In this article, there are two methods of amending the
Constitution and they apply to two different sets of articlesof the Constitution. One method is that amendment canbe made by special majority of the two houses of the
Parliament. The other method is more difficult: it requiresspecial majority of the Parliament and consent of half ofthe State legislatures. Note that all amendments to the
Constitution are initiated only in the Parliament. Besides
the special majority in the Parliament no outside agencyŠŠlike a constitution commission or a separate bodyŠisrequired for amending the Constitution.Similarly, after the passage in the Parliament and insome cases, in State legislatures, no referendum is
required for ratification of the amendment. An amendmentWhat happens if some Stateswant an amendment to the
Constitution?  Can™t they
propose an amendment? I think
this is another example of
favouring the centre against the
States!
202Indian Constitution at Workbill, like all other bills, goes to the President for his assent, but in thiscase, the President has no powers to send it back for reconsideration.
These details show how rigid and complicated the amending processcould have been. Our Constitution avoids these complications. Thismakes the amendment procedure relatively simple. But more
importantly, this process underlines an important principle: onlyelected representatives of the people are empowered to consider andtake final decisions on the question of amendments. Thus, sovereignty
of elected representatives (parliamentary sovereignty) is the basis ofthe amendment procedure.Special MajorityIn the chapters on Election, Executive and Judiciary, we have comeacross provisions that require ‚special majority™. Let us repeat againwhat special majority means. Ordinarily, all business of the legislaturerequires that a motion or resolution or bill should get the support ofa simple majority of the members voting at that time. Suppose thatat the time of voting on a bill, 247 members were present in the
house and all of them participated in the voting on the bill. Then, thebill would be passed if at least 124 members voted in favour of thebill. Not so in the case of an amendment bill. Amendment to the
Constitution requires two different kinds of special majorities: in the
first place, those voting in favour of the amendment bill shouldconstitute at least half of the total strength of that House. Secondly,the supporters of the amendment bill must also constitute two-thirds
of those who actually take part in voting. Both Houses of theParliament must pass the amendment bill separately in this samemanner (there is no provision for a joint session). For every amendment
bill, this special majority is required.Can you see the significance of this requirement? In the Lok Sabhathere are 545 members. Therefore, any amendment must be
supported by a minimum of 273 members. Even if only 300 members
are present at the time of voting, the amendment bill must get thesupport of 273 out of them. But imagine that 400 members of LokSabha have voted on an amendment bill. How many members should
support the bill to get the bill passed?In addition to this, both the Houses must pass the amendmentbill (with special majorities) separately. This means that unless there
203Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living DocumentTwo principles dominate the various procedures ofamending the constitutions in most modernconstitutions.
±One is the principle of special majority. Forinstance, the constitutions of U.S., South Africa,Russia, etc. have employed this principle: In thecase of  constitution of US, it is two-thirdsmajority, while in South Africa and Russia, for
some amendments, three-fourths majority isrequired.±The other principle that is popular among many
modern constitutions is that of people™sparticipation in the process of amending the
constitution. In Switzerland, people can eveninitiate an amendment. Other examples ofcountries where people initiate or approveamendment to the constitution are Russia andItaly, among others.I am fed up with this businessof special majority. It forces you
to make difficult calculations all
the time. Is it politics or maths?ﬁIf those who are dissatisfied with theConstitution have only to obtain a 2/3 majority
and if they cannot obtain even (that)..., theirdissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot bedeemed to be shared by the general public.ﬂNote that Dr. Ambedkar is talking here not onlyof parliamentary majority. He refers to ‚sharing
(of the views) by the general public™. Thisindicates that behind the majority there is theprinciple of public opinion that governs decision-making.is sufficient consensus over the proposed amendment, itcannot be passed. If the party in power enjoys very thin
majority, it can pass legislation of its choice and can getbudget approved even if the opposition does not agree.But it would need to take at least some opposition parties
into confidence, if it wanted to amend the Constitution.So, the basic principle behind the amending procedure isDr. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 976, 25 November 1949
