SecularismSecularismPolitical Theory111Chapter 8SecularismWhen different cultures and communities exist within the same country, how should ademocratic state ensure equality for each of them? This is the question that emerged inthe previous chapter. In this chapter we will try and see how the concept of secularismmay be applied to answer that concern. In India, the idea of secularism is ever present inpublic debates and discussions, yet there is something very perplexing about the stateof secularism in India.€ On the one hand, almost every politician swears by it.€ Everypolitical party professes to be secular.€ On the other hand, all kinds of anxieties anddoubts beset secularism in India.€ Secularism is challenged not only by clerics andreligious nationalists but by some politicians, social activists and even academics.In this chapter we will engage in this ongoing debate by asking the following  questions:oWhat is the meaning of secularism?oIs secularism a western implant on Indian soil?oIs it suitable for societies where religion continues to exercise a strong influence onindividual lives?oDoes secularism show partiality? Does it ‚pamper™ minorities?o Is secularism anti-religious?€At the end of this chapter you should be able to understand and appreciate theimportance of secularism in a democratic society like India, and learn something aboutthe distinctiveness of Indian secularism.Overview
SecularismSecularism112Political Theory8.1 WHAT IS SECULARISM?Though Jews faced discrimination for centuries throughout Europe,in the present state of Israel, Arab minorities, both Christian andMuslims, are excluded from social, political and economic benefitsavailable to Jewish citizens.€ Subtle forms of discrimination alsocontinue to persist against non-Christians in several parts of
Europe.€ The condition of religious minorities in the neighbouringstates of Pakistan and Bangladesh has also generated considerableconcern.  Such examples remind us of the continuing importanceof secularism for people and societies in today™s world.Inter-religious Domination€In our own country, the Constitution declares that every Indian citizenhas a right to live with freedom and dignity in any part of the country.€
Yet in reality, many forms of exclusion and discrimination continueto persist.€Consider three most stark examples:oMore than 2,700 Sikhs were massacred in Delhi and many otherparts of the country in 1984. The families of the victims feel thatthe guilty were not punished.€oSeveral thousands of Hindu Kashmiri pandits have been forcedto leave their homes in the Kashmir valley; they have not beenable to return to their homes for more than two decades.oMore than 1,000 persons, mostly Muslims, were massacredduring the post-Godhra riots in Gujarat in 2002. The surviving
members of many of these  families could not go back to thevillages in which they lived.What do these examples have in common? They all have to dowith discrimination in one form or the other. In each case membersof one community are targeted and victimised on account of theirreligious identity. In other words, basic freedoms of a set of citizens
are denied. Some might even say that these incidents are instances
of religious persecution and they reflect inter-religious domination.Secularism is first and foremost a doctrine that opposes all suchforms of inter-religious domination. This is however only one crucialaspect of the concept of secularism. An equally important dimension
SecularismSecularismPolitical Theory113of secularism is its opposition to intra-religious domination. Let  usget deeper into this issue.Intra-religious DominationSome people believe that religion is merely the ‚opium of the masses™and that, one day, when the basic needs of all are fulfilled and theylead a happy and contented life, religion will disappear.  Such aview comes from an exaggerated sense of human potential.  It isunlikely that human beings will ever be able to fully know the worldand control it. We may be able to prolong our life but will neverbecome immortal.  Disease can never be entirely eliminated, norcan we get rid of an element of accident and luck from our lives.Separation and loss are endemic to the human condition. While alarge part of our suffering is man-made and hence eliminable, atleast some of our suffering is not made by man.  Religion, art andphilosophy are responses to such sufferings. Secularism too acceptsthis and therefore it is not anti-religious.However, religion has its share of some deep-rooted problems.For example, one can hardly think of a religion that treats its maleand female members on an equal footing.  In religions such asHinduism, some sections have faced persistent discrimination. For
example dalits have been barred from entering Hindu temples. Insome parts of the country, Hindu woman cannot enter temples.
When religion is organised, it is frequently taken over by its most
conservative faction, which does not tolerate any dissent. Religious
fundamentalism in parts of the US has become a big problem andendangers peace both within the country and outside. Many religionsfragment into sects which leads to frequent sectarian violence andpersecution of dissenting minorities.Thus religious domination cannot be identified only with inter-religious domination.  It takes another conspicuous form, namely,intra-religious domination. As secularism is opposed to all forms ofinstitutionalised religious domination, it challenges  not merely inter-religious but also intra-religious domination.We now possess a general idea of secularism. It is a normativedoctrine which seeks to realise a secular society, i.e., one devoid of
SecularismSecularism114Political Theoryeither inter-religious or intra-religious domination.  Put positively,it promotes freedom within religions, and equality between, as wellas within, religions. Within this larger framework, let us now considera narrower and more specific question, namely: What kind of stateis necessary to  realise these goals? In other words, let us considerhow a state committed to the ideal of secularism should relate toreligion and religious communities.8.2 SECULAR STA
TEPerhaps one way of preventing religious discrimination is to worktogether for mutual enlightenment.€ Education is one way of helpingto change the mindset of people.€ Individual examples of sharingand mutual help can  also contribute towards reducing prejudiceand suspicion between communities. It is always inspiring to readstories of Hindus saving Muslims or Muslims saving Hindus in themidst of a deadly communal riot.€ But it is unlikely
that mere education or the goodness of some personswill eliminate religious discrimination.€ In modernsocieties, states have enormous public power.€ Howthey function is bound to make a crucial difference tothe outcome of any struggle to create a society lessridden with inter-community conflict and religiousdiscrimination. For this reason, we need to see whatkind of state is needed to prevent religious conflictand to promote religious harmony.How should a state prevent domination by any religious group?For a start, a state must not be run by the heads of any particularreligion. A state governed directly by a priestly order is calledtheocratic. Theocratic states, such as the Papal states of Europe inmedieval times or in recent times the Taliban-controlled state,lacking separation between religious and political institutions, areknown for their hierarchies, and oppressions, and reluctance toallow freedom of religion to members of other religious groups.  Ifwe value peace, freedom and equality, religious institutions andstate institutions must be separated.Some people think that the separation of state and religion issufficient for the existence of a secular state.  This does not appearList some of the ways inwhich you feel communalharmony could bepromoted.LET™S DO ITDo
SecularismSecularismPolitical Theory115to be so.  Many states which are non-theocratic continue to have aclose alliance with a particular religion.  For example, the state inEngland in the sixteenth century was not run by a priestly classbut clearly favoured the Anglican Church and its members.  Englandhad an  established Anglican religion, which was the official religionof the state.  Today Pakistan has an official state religion, namelySunni Islam.  Such regimes may leave little scope for internal dissentor religious equality.To be truly secular, a state must not only refuse to be theocraticbut also have no formal, legal alliance with any religion.  Theseparation of religion-state is, however, a necessary but not asufficient ingredient of a secular state. A secular state must becommitted to principles and goals which are at least partly derivedfrom non-religious sources. These ends should includepeace, religious freedom, freedom from religiouslygrounded oppression, discrimination and exclusion,as also inter-religious and intra-religious equality.To promote these ends the state must be separatedfrom organised religion and its institutions for the sakeof some of these values. However,  there is no reason tosuggest that this separation should take a particular
form. In fact  the nature and extent of separation maytake different forms, depending upon the specific valuesit is meant to promote and the way in which  thesevalues are spelt out. We will now  consider two suchconceptions: the mainstream western conception bestrepresented by the American state, and an alternativeconception best exemplified by the Indian state.8.3 THE WESTERN MODEL OF SECULARISMAll secular states have one thing in common: they are neithertheocratic nor do they establish a religion. However, in most commonlyprevalent conceptions, inspired mainly by the American model,separation of religion and state is understood as mutual exclusion:the state will not intervene in the affairs of religion and, in the samemanner, religion will not interfere in the affairs of the state.  EachLearning more aboutother religions is thefirst step towardslearning to respect andaccept other people andtheir beliefs. But thatneed not mean that weshould not be able tostand up for what we
feel are basic humanvalues.LET™S DEBATEﬁ ﬂ
