124Indian Constitution at WorkChapter SixJUDICIARYINTRODUCTIONMany times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individualsor private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciaryis an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact,one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has
played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. Inthis chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In thechapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is veryimportant for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would beable to understand
±the meaning of independence of judiciary;±the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;±the role of the Judiciary in interpreting the Constitution; and±the relationship between the Judiciary and the Parliament of India.
125Chapter 6: JudiciaryWHY DO WE N
EED AN I
NDEPENDENT J
UDICIARY?In any society, disputes are bound to arise between individuals,between groups and between individuals or groups and government.
All such disputes must be settled by an independent body inaccordance with the principle of rule of law. This idea of rule of lawimplies that all individuals Š rich and poor, men or women, forward
or backward castes Š are subjected to the same law. The principal
role of the judiciary is to protect rule of law and ensure supremacyof law. It safeguards rights of the individual, settles disputes inaccordance with the law and ensures that democracy does not give
way to individual or groupdictatorship. In order to be able to doall this, it is necessary that the
judiciary is independent of anypolitical pressures.What is meant by an independentjudiciary? How is this independenceensured?Independence of JudiciarySimply stated independence ofjudiciary means that±the other organs of the governmentlike the executive and legislaturemust not restrain the functioningof the judiciary in such a way thatit is unable to do justice.±the other organs of the government
should not interfere with thedecision of the judiciary.±judges must be able to perform
their functions without fear orfavour.Independence of the judiciary doesnot imply arbitrariness or absence of
accountability.  Judiciary is a part ofthe democratic political structure of theNo fisticuffs please, this is rule of law!READ  A CARTOONR K Laxman in The Times of India.
126Indian Constitution at Workcountry. It is therefore accountable to the Constitution,to the democratic traditions and to the people of the
country.How can the independence of judiciary be providedand protected?The Indian Constitution has ensured theindependence of the judiciary through a number of
measures. The legislature is not involved in the process of
appointment of judges. Thus, it was believed that party
politics would not play a role in the process ofappointments. In order to be appointed as a judge, aperson must have experience as a lawyer and/or must be
well versed in law. Political opinions of the person or his/her political loyalty should not be the criteria forappointments to judiciary.The judges have a fixed tenure. They hold office tillreaching the age of retirement. Only in exceptional cases,
judges may be removed. But otherwise, they have security
of tenure. Security of tenure ensures that judges could
function without fear or favour. The Constitutionprescribes a very difficult procedure for removal of judges.The Constitution makers believed that a difficult
procedure of removal would provide security of office tothe members of judiciary.The judiciary is not financially dependent on eitherthe executive or legislature. The Constitution provides that
the salaries and allowances of the judges are not subjectedto the approval of the legislature. The actions and
decisions of the judges are immune from personal
criticisms. The judiciary has the power to penalise thosewho are found guilty of contempt of court. This authorityof the court is seen as an effective protection to the judges
from unfair criticism. Parliament cannot discuss theconduct of the judges except when the proceeding  toremove a judge is being carried out. This gives the
judiciary independence to adjudicate without fear of beingcriticised.I remember the case of Machal
mentioned in chapter two.
Don™t they say, ‚justice delayed
is justice denied™? Somebody
should do something about
this.
127Chapter 6: JudiciaryActivityHold a debate in class on the following
topic.Which of the following factors do you think,work as constraints over the judges in
giving their rulings? Do you think these arejustified?±Constitution±Precedents±Opinion of other courts±Public opinion±Media±Traditions of law±Laws±Time and staff constraints±Fear of public criticism±Fear of action by executiveAppointment of Judges
The appointment of judges has never been free frompolitical controversy. It is part of the political process. Itmakes a difference who serves in the Supreme Court and
High CourtŠ a difference in how the Constitution is
interpreted. The political philosophy of the judges, theirviews about active and assertive judiciary or controlledand committed judiciary have an impact on the fate of the
legislations enacted. Council of Ministers, Governors andChief Ministers and Chief Justice of India Š all influencethe process of judicial appointment.As far as the appointment of the Chief Justice of India(CJI) is concerned, over the years, a convention had
developed whereby the senior-most judge of the Supreme
Court was appointed as the Chief Justice of India. This
convention was however broken twice. In 1973 A. N. Raywas appointed as CJI superseding three senior Judges.Again, Justice M.H. Beg was appointed superseding
Justice H.R. Khanna (1975).I am afraid, I am gettingconfused. In a democracy, you
can criticise the Prime Minister
or even the President, but not
the judges! And what is this
contempt of court? But am I
being guilty of contempt if I
asked about these matters?
128Indian Constitution at WorkThe other Judges of the Supreme Court and the HighCourt are appointed by the President after ‚consulting™the CJI. This, in effect, meant that the final decisions inmatters of appointment rested with the Council ofMinisters. What then, was the status of the consultation
with the Chief Justice?This matter came up before the Supreme Court againand again between 1982 and 1998. Initially, the court
felt that role of the Chief Justice was purely consultative.
Then it took the view that the opinion of the Chief Justicemust be followed by the President. Finally, the SupremeCourt has come up with a novel procedure: it has
suggested that the Chief Justice should recommendnames of persons to be appointed in consultation withfour senior-most judges of the Court. Thus, the Supreme
Court has established the principle of collegiality inmaking recommendations for appointments. At themoment therefore, in matters of appointment the decision
of the group of senior judges of the Supreme Court carries
greater weight. Thus, in matters of appointment to thejudiciary, the Supreme Court and the Council of Ministersplay an important role.Removal of JudgesThe removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the SupremeCourt or High Court can be removed only on the groundof proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion
containing the charges against the judge must be
approved by special majority in both Houses of theParliament. Do you remember what special majoritymeans? We have studied this in the chapter on Elections.
It is clear from this procedure that removal of a judge is avery difficult procedure and unless there is a generalconsensus among Members of the Parliament, a judge
cannot be removed. It should also be noted that while inmaking appointments, the executive plays a crucial role;the legislature has the powers of removal. This has ensuredBut I think, finally the Councilof Ministers would have greater
say in appointing judges. Or is
it that the judiciary is a self-
appointing body?
129Chapter 6: Judiciaryboth balance of power and independence of the judiciary. So far,only one case of removal of a judge of the Supreme Court came up
for consideration before the Parliament. In that case, though themotion got two-thirds majority, it did not have the support of themajority of the total strength of the House and therefore, the judge
was not removed.Unsuccessful Attempt to Remove a JudgeIn 1991 the first-ever motion to remove a Supreme CourtJustice was signed by 108 members of Parliament. Justice
Ramaswamy, during his tenure as the Chief Justice ofthe Punjab High Court was accused of misappropriatingfunds. In 1992, a year after the Parliament had startedthe impeachment proceedings, a high-profile inquirycommission consisting of Judges of Supreme Court found
Justice V. Ramaswamy ﬁguilty of wilful and gross misusesof office . . . and moral turpitude by using public funds forprivate purposes and reckless disregard of statutoryrulesﬂ while serving as Chief Justice of Punjab andHaryana. Despite this strong indictment, Ramaswamy
survived the parliamentary motion recommendingremoval. The motion recommending his removal got therequired two-third majority among the members who werepresent and voting, but the Congress party abstainedfrom voting in the House. Therefore, the motion could not
get the support of one-half of the total strength of theHouse.Check your progress±Why is independence of the judiciaryimportant?±Do you think that executive should have
the power to appoint judges?±If you were asked to make suggestionsfor changing the procedure of appointingjudges, what changes would you
suggest?
