IntroductionPolitical TheoryPolitical Theory1
IntroductionPolitical Theory2Political TheoryHuman beings are unique in two respects: they possess reason and
the ability to reflect on their actions. They also have the capacity touse language and communicate with each other. Unlike other species,
they can express their innermost thoughts and desires; they can

share their ideas and discuss what they consider to be good and
desirable. Political theory has its roots in these twin aspects of the

human self. It analyzes certain basic questions such as how should
society be organized? Why do we need government? What is the best
form of government? Does law limit our freedom? What does the
state owe its citizens? What do we owe each other as citizens?Political theory examines questions of this kind andsystematically thinks about the values that inform political life Œ
values such as freedom, equality and justice. It explains the
meanings and significance of these and other related concepts. Itclarifies the existing definitions of these concepts by focusing onsome major political thinkers of the past and present. It also
examines the extent to which freedom or equality are actually present

in the institutions that we participate in everyday such as schools,
shops, buses or trains or government offices. At an advanced level,

it looks at whether existing definitions are adequate and how existinginstitutions (government, bureaucracy) and policy practices must
be modified to become more democratic. The objective of political
theory is to train citizens to think rationally about political questions
and assess correctly the political events of our time.
In this chapter, we will examine what is meant by politics and
political theory and why we should study it.1.1 WHAT
 IS POLITICS?You would have noticed that people have different ideas
about what politics is. Political leaders, and personswho contest elections and hold political office, may argue
that it is a kind of public service. Some others associatepolitics with manipulation and intrigue undertaken to
pursue ambitions and satisfy wants. A few think of
politics as what politicians do. If they see politicians
defecting from parties, making false promises and tall
ﬁWhat is Politicsﬂ.LET™S DEBATE
ﬁ ﬂ
