PsychologyTEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XI
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children™s lifeat school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our systemand causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance ofsharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures willtake us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of educationoutlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals andteachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and topursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that given space,time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with theinformation passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as thesole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sitesof learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceiveand treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body ofknowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode offunctioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching daysare actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluationwill also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children™s life atschool a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabusdesigners have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuringand reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for childpsychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiringhands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciatesthe hard work done by the Textbook Development Committee responsible for this
textbook. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group of Social Sciences,Professor Hari Vasudevan (Department of History, Calcutta University, Kolkata)and the Chief Advisor for this textbook, Professor R.C. Tripathi (Director
, G.B. PantSocial Science Institute, Allahabad) for guiding the work of this committee. Severalteachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions andorganisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of theNational Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for theirvaluable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to the systemic reform
and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomescomments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision andrefinement.          DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of Educational20 December 2005Research and Trainingiv
PREFACEPsychology is one of the youngest sciences but one of the fastest growing. Thereare many who believe that the 21st century is going to be the century of biologicalsciences along with psychological sciences. Development in the fields of
neurosciences, as well as physical sciences have opened new doors to solve themysteries of mind and human behaviour. There is no human endeavour which isgoing to remain unaffected by this new knowledge which is getting created. Oneonly hopes that it will enable people to live their lives more meaningfully and toorganise human systems better. In fact, as a consequence, a large number of newjob opportunities have surfaced. Psychology already has made inroads into manynew domains.The writing of this textbook has been truly a collective effort. It has benefittedfrom the inputs received from various subject experts in various forms, from collegeand school teachers, and also students. In writing this textbook, we have tried to
address some of the concerns raised by the evaluators of the previous edition ofthis textbook, while also making use of some portions of it. The textbook follows
the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) Œ 2005. In keeping with the general
guidelines, we have tried to reduce the load and attempted to make it more
comprehensible for the students. In doing so, we have tried to relate psychological
concepts with everyday human behaviour and also with various life experiences.
How far one has succeeded in this, is left for the teachers and students to judge.
One major challenge which teachers of psychology face is to make their students
analyse human behaviour in a scientific manner and to use explanations which
are not commonsensical. More than any other scientific discipline, psychology runs
the risk of trivialisation. It is our hope that students who go through this course will
develop a proper scientific attitude for analysing others and their own behaviour
and use it for personal growth.We take great pleasure in placing this textbook in the hands of students andteachers and also express our gratitude to all who have provided their unstintedsupport in its writing and production.
Change the World by Changing MeThe Sufi Bayazid says this about himself:ﬁI was a revolutionary when I was youngand all my prayer to God was: ‚Lord, giveme the energy to change the world.™ ﬂﬁAs I approached middle age and realisedthat half my life was gone without mychanging a single soul, I changed myprayer to: ‚Lord, give me the grace tochange all those who come in contactwith me. Just my family and friends,and I shall be content.™ ﬂﬁNow that I am an old man and my daysare numbered, my one prayer is: ‚Lord,give me the grace to change myself.™If I had prayed for this right fromthe start I should not have wastedmy life.ﬂSOURCE : ﬁTHE SONG OF THE BIRDﬂ ANTHONY DE MELLO, S.J.(ANAND: GUJARAT SAHITYA PRAKASH), 1987
