leisure opportunities s/he avails, thehealth access s/he has, i.e. her/hislifestyle in general. As in the case ofsocial structure, social stratification
constrains individual action.One of the central concerns of thesociological perspective has been tounderstand the dialectical relationshipbetween the individual and society. Youwill recall C.Wright Mill™s elaboration ofthe sociological imagination that seeks
to unfold the interplay between anindividual™s biography and society™shistory. It is towards understanding
this dialectical relationship between the
society and individual that we need todiscuss the three central concepts ofstructure, stratification and social
processes in this chapter. In the nextfew chapters we then move on to howsocial structure in rural and urban
societies are different, to broaderrelationships between environment andsociety. In the last two chapters we look
at western social thinkers and Indian
sociologists and their writings thatwould help us further understand theideas of social structure, stratificationas well as social processes.CHAPTER 1SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND SOCIALPROCESSES IN SOCIETYINTRODUCTIONYou will recall that the earlier bookIntroducing Sociology, Class XI(NCERT, 2006) had begun with a
discussion on the relationship betweenpersonal problems and social issues.We also saw how individuals arelocated within collectivities such asgroups, classes, gender, castes andtribes. Indeed each of you, is a memberof not just one kind of collectivity, butmany overlapping ones. For instance,you are a member of your own peergroup, your family and kin, your classand gender, your country and region.Each individual thus has a specificlocation in the social structure andsocial stratification system (see pages28-35 in Introducing Sociology). Thisalso implies that they have different
levels and types of access to socialresources. In other words the choicesan individual has in life in terms ofthe school s/he goes to Š or if s/hegoes to school at all Š would dependon the social stratum that s/he belongs
to. Likewise with the clothes s/he getsto wear, the food s/he 
consumes, the
 2UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYregularities that the concept of socialstructure refers. Upto a point, it is
helpful to think of the structuralcharacteristics of societies asresembling the structure of a building.A building has walls, a floor and a roof,
which together give it a particular‚shape™ or form (Giddens 2004: 667).But the metaphor can be a verymisleading one if applied too strictly.Social structures are made up ofhuman actions and relationships.
What gives these their patterning is
their repetition across periods of timeand distances of space. Thus, the ideasof social reproduction and social
structure are very closely related to oneanother in sociological analysis. Forexample, consider a school and a
family structure. In a school certainways of behaving are repeated over theyears and become institutions. For
instance admission procedures, codes
of conduct, annual functions, dailyassemblies and in some cases evenschool anthems. Likewise in families
certain ways of behaving, marriagepractices, notions of relationships,duties and expectations are set. Even
as old members of the family or schoolmay pass away and new membersenter, the institution goes on. Yet we
also know that changes do take placewithin the family and in schools.The above discussion and activityshould help us understand human
societies as buildings that are at everymoment being reconstructed by thevery bricks that compose them. For as
we saw for ourselves human beings inschools or families do bring changesThe central question that thischapter seeks to discuss is to whatextent the individual constrained by,and to what extent s/he is free of, thesocial structure? To what extent doesone™s position in society or location inthe stratification system governindividual choice? Do social structureand social stratification influence themanner people act? Do they shape theway individuals cooperate, competeand conflict with each other?In this chapter we deal briefly withthe terms social structure and socialstratification. You have alreadydiscussed social stratification in somedetail in Chapter 2 of the earlierbook Introducing Sociology, Class XI(NCERT, 2006). We then move on to

focus on three social processes namely;cooperation, competition and conflict.In dealing with each of these processeswe shall try and see how social structureand stratification impinge themselves on
the social processes. In other words howindividuals and groups cooperate,compete and conflict depending upontheir position within the social structure
and stratification system.SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND STRATIFICATIONThe term social structure points to thefact that society is structured Š i.e.,organised or arranged Š in particularways. The social environments inwhich we exist do not just consist ofrandom assortments of events or
actions. There are underlyingregularities, or patterns, in how peoplebehave and in the relationships theyhave with one another. It is to these
3SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND SOCIAL PROCESSES IN SOCIETYDifferent types of buildings in rural and urban areas
 4UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYto reproduce the structure even whileintroducing changes. They cooperateat various levels in their everyday lives
towards this reproduction. No less trueis the fact that they also compete witheach other, often viciously and
ruthlessly. The fact remains that alongwith cooperative behaviour we alsowitness serious conflict. And as weshall find later in this chapter,cooperation can be enforced and
thereby serve to conceal conflict.A major theme pursued by EmileDurkheim (and by many othersociological authors since) is that thesocieties exert social constraint overthe actions of their members.Durkheim argued that society hasprimacy over the individual person.Society is far more than the sum ofindividual acts; it has a ‚firmness™ or‚solidity™ comparable to structures in
the material environment.Think of a person standing in aroom with several doors. The structureof the room constrains the range of hisor her possible activities. The placingof the walls and doors, for exampledefines the routes of exit and entry.
Social structure, according toDurkheim, constrains our activities ina parallel way, setting limits to what
we can do as individuals. It is ‚external™to us just as the walls of the room are.Other social thinkers like KarlMarx would emphasise the constraintsof social structure but would at the
same time stress human creativity oragency to both reproduce and changesocial structure. Marx argued thathuman beings make history, but notas they wish to or in conditions of their
choice, but within the constraints andpossibilities of the historical andstructural situation that they are in.To recall the concept of social strati-
fication in Chapter 2 of 
IntroducingSociology, 
Class XI (NCERT, 2006).
Social stratification refers to the

existence of structured inequalitiesbetween groups in society, in termsof their access to material or symbolicActivity 1Discuss with your grandparents and others of that generation to find out about theways in which families/schools have changed and the ways in which they haveremained the same.Compare descriptions of families in old films/television serials/novels withcontemporary depictions.Can you observe patterns and regularities of social behaviour in your family? Inother words can you describe the structure of your family?Discuss with your teachers how they understand the school as a structure. Dostudents, teachers and the staff have to act in certain ways to maintain or reproducethe structure? Can you think of any changes in either your school or family? Werethese changes resisted? Who resisted them and why?
5SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND SOCIAL PROCESSES IN SOCIETYrewards. While all societies involvesome forms of social stratification,modern societies are often marked bywide differences in wealth and power.While the most evident forms ofstratification in modern societies
involve class divisions, others likerace and caste, region andcommunity, tribe and gender alsocontinue to matter as bases of socialstratification.You will recall that social structureimplied a certain patterning of social
behaviour. Social stratification as partof the broader social structure islikewise characterised by a certainpattern of inequality. Inequality is not
something which is randomlydistributed between individuals insociety. It is systematically linked tomembership in different kinds of socialgroups. Members of a given group will
have features in common, and if theyare in a superior position they willusually see to it that their privilegedposition is passed on to their children.The concept of stratification, then,refers to the idea that society is dividedinto a patterned structure of unequalgroups, and usually implies that thisstructure tends to persist acrossgenerations (Jayaram 1987:22).It is necessary to distinguishbetween different advantages whichcan be distributed unequally. Thereare three basic forms of advantagewhich privileged groups may enjoy:(i)Life Chances
: All those materialadvantages which improve the
quality of life of the recipient Š thisThis point of view is expressed by Durkheim in his famous statement: When Iperform my duties as a brother, a husband or a citizen and carry out thecommitments I have entered into, I fulfil my obligations which are defined in lawand custom and which are external to myself and my actions–Similarly, the believerhas discovered from birth, ready fashioned, the beliefs and practices of his religiouslife; if they existed before he did, it follows that they exist outside him. The systems
of signs that I employ to express my thoughts, the monetary system I use to paymy debts, the credit instruments I utilise in my commercial relationships, thepractices I follow in my profession, etc. all function independently of the use Imake of them. Considering in turn each member of society, the following remarkscould be made for every single one of them.Source: Durkheim Emile, 1933, The Division of Labour in Society, pp.50-1, A FreePress Paperback, The MacMillan Company, New York).Activity 2Think of examples that reveal bothhow human beings are constrained bysocial structure and also of exampleswhere individuals defy social structureand transform it. Recall ourdiscussion on socialisation inIntroducing Sociology (pages 78-79 ).
 6UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYmay include not only economicadvantages of wealth and income,
but also benefits such as health,job security and recreation.(ii)Social Status: Prestige or highstanding in the eyes of othermembers of the society.(iii)Political Influence: The ability of onegroup to dominate others, or tohave preponderant influence overdecision-making, or to benefitadvantageously from decisions.The above discussion on the threesocial processes will repeatedly drawattention to the manner that differentbases of social stratification likegender or class constrain social
processes. The opportunities andresources available to individuals andgroups to engage in competition,cooperation or conflict are shaped bysocial structure and social
stratification. At the same time,humans do act to modify the structureand system of stratification that exists.TWO WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SOCIALPROCESSES IN SOCIOLOGYIn the earlier book IntroducingSociology, Class XI (NCERT, 2006) youhave seen the limitations of commonsense knowledge. The problem is notthat commonsense knowledge isnecessarily false, but that it is
unexamined and taken 
for granted. By
contrast, the sociological perspectivequestions everything and acceptsnothing as a given. It would thereforenot rest content with an explanation
which suggests that humans competeor cooperate or conflict as the case maybe because it is human nature to do
so. The assumption behind suchexplanations is that there is somethingintrinsic and universal in humannature that accounts for theseprocesses. However, as we have seen
earlier, sociology is not satisfied witheither psychological or naturalistexplanations (see pages 7-8 of
Introducing Sociology. Sociology seeks
to explain these processes ofcooperation, competition and conflictin terms of the actual social structureof society.Activity 3Think of examples of cooperation,competition and conflict in youreveryday lifeIn 
Introducing Sociology 
wediscussed how there are differences andplural understandings of society (pages24-25, 36). We 
saw how functionalistand conflict perspectives varied in theirunderstanding of different institutions,
be it the family, the economy or socialstratification and social control. Notsurprisingly therefore, these twoperspectives seek to understand theseprocesses a bit differently. But both Karl
Marx (usually associated with a conflictperspective) and Emile Durkheim(usually identified with a functionalistperspective) presume that humanbeings have to cooperate to meet their
basic needs, and to produce andreproduce themselves and their world.The conflict perspective emphasiseshow these forms of cooperation
7SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND SOCIAL PROCESSES IN SOCIETYDifferent types of processes
 8UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYrefer to the fulfilment of the broadestconditions which are necessary for a
system™s existence (and whichtherefore keep it alive and prevent itsdestruction) such as:(i)The socialisation of new members;
(ii)A 
shared system of 
communication;
(iii)Methods of assigning individuals
to roles.You are well aware how thefunctionalist perspective rests upon theassumption that different parts or
organs of society have a function or roleto play for the broader maintenanceand functioning of the whole society.Seen from this perspective, cooperation,competition and conflict can be seen
as universal features of all societies,explained as the result of the inevitableinteractions among humans living insociety and pursuing their ends. Sincethe focus is on system sustenance,changed from one historical society toanother. For instance, it would
recognise that in simple societieswhere no surplus was produced, therewas cooperation between individualsand groups who were not divided onclass or caste or race lines. But in
societies where surplus is produced Šwhether feudal or capitalist Š thedominant class appropriates thesurplus and cooperation wouldnecessarily involve potential conflict
and competition. The conflict view thusemphasises that groups andindividuals are placed differentiallyand unequally within the system ofproduction relations. Thus, the factory
owner and the factory worker docooperate in their everyday work. Buta certain conflict of interests woulddefine their relationship.The understanding that informs theconflict perspective is that in societies
divided by caste, or class or patriarchy,some groups are disadvantaged anddiscriminated against. Furthermore thedominant groups sustain this unequalorder by a series of cultural norms, andoften coercion or even violence. As youwill see in the next paragraphs, it isnot that the functionalist perspectivefails to appreciate the role of such
norms or sanctions. But it understandstheir function in terms of the societyas a whole, and not in terms of thedominant sections who control society.The functionalist perspective ismainly concerned with the ‚system
requirements™ of society Š certainfunctional imperatives, functionalrequisites and prerequisites. TheseBabul Mora. Naihar Chuto hi jaiFears of the Natal home is left behindBabul ki dua-ein leti jaJa tujhko sukhi sansar mileMaike ki kabhi na yaad aayeSasural me itna pyar mileTake your father™s blessings/prayeras you go;Go, and (may you) get a happyhousehold;May you never be reminded of yourmother™s home;(Because of) all the love you receive
At your in-laws™ place. (Basu 2001: 128)
9SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND SOCIAL PROCESSES IN SOCIETYActivity 4Discuss whether women are cooperating, or refusing to engage in conflict orcompetition because of a range of normative compulsions. Are they cooperatingwith the given norm of male inheritance because of the fear of losing the affectionof their brothers if they behave otherwise? The song in the box below is specific toa region, but evokes the more general fears of natal abandonment for women in apatrilineal society.Bride leaving for groom™s house in a ‚Doli™competition and conflict is looked atwith the understanding that in mostcases they tend to get resolved without
too much distress, and that they mayeven help society in various ways.Sociological studies have alsoshown how norms and patterns ofsocialisation often ensure that a
particular social order persists, eventhough it is skewed in the interests ofone section. In other words therelationship between cooperation,competition and conflict is often complexand not easily separable.In order to understand howcooperation may entail conflict, and thedifference between ‚enforced™ and‚voluntary™ cooperation, let us look atthe very contentious issue of women™sright to property in their natal family.A study was conducted among differentsections of society to understand theattitude towards taking natal property(see pages 41-46 of 
IntroducingSociology). A significant number ofwomen (41.7 per cent) evoked thetheme of a daughter™s love and love for
a daughter when speaking about theirrights to property. But they emphasisedapprehension rather than affection bysaying they would not claim full or anyshare of natal property because theywere afraid this would sour relationswith their brothers or cause their
brothers™ wives to hate them, and thatas a result they would no longer be
 10UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYwelcome in their natal homes. Thisattitude represents one of the dominantmetaphors mediating women™s refusalof property– A woman demanding hershare is the greedy shrew or ‚hak lenewali™. There was also a close connectionbetween these feelings and theapparently obverse ones of the desireto continue to be part of the natal familyby actively contributing to its prosperityor being available to deal with its crises.Activity 2 would enable you toappreciate how apparently cooperativebehaviour can also be seen as aproduct of deep conflicts in society. Butwhen these conflicts are not expressedopenly or challenged, the impressionremains that there is no conflict, butonly cooperation. A functionalist viewoften uses the term accommodation toexplain situations such as the one
described above, where women wouldprefer not to claim property rights intheir natal home. It would be seen asan effort to compromise and co-existdespite conflict.Activity 5Think of other kinds of socialbehaviour which may appear as co-operative but may conceal deeperconflicts of society.COOPERATION AND DIVISION OF LABOURThe idea of cooperation rests on certainassumptions about human behaviour.It is argued that without human
cooperation it would be difficult forhuman life to survive. Further it isargued that even in the animal worldwe witness cooperation, whether theybe ants or bees or mammals.
Comparison with the animal world
should however be done carefully. Welook at two very different theoreticaltraditions in sociology to illustrate the
point, those represented by EmileDurkheim and Karl Marx.Sociology for the most part did notagree with the assumption that humannature is necessarily nasty andbrutish. Emile Durkheim argues
against a vision of ﬁprimitive humanity
whose hunger and thirst, always badlysatisfied, were their only passionsﬂ.Instead he argued:They overlook the essential elementof moral life, that is, the moderatinginfluence that society exercises overits members, which tempers andneutralises 
the brutal action of thestruggle for existence and selection.Wherever there are societies, thereis altruism, because there issolidarity. Thus, we find altruismfrom the beginning of humanity and
even in truly intemperate form.(Durkheim 1933)For Durkheim solidarity, the moralforce of society, is fundamental for ourunderstanding of cooperation andthereby the functioning of society. The
role of division of labour Š which
implies cooperation Š is precisely tofulfill certain needs of society. Thedivision of labour is at the same time
a law of nature and also a moral ruleof human conduct.Durkheim distinguished betweenmechanical and organic solidarity that
