INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYTEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XI
First EditionMarch 2006  Phalguna 1927ReprintedDecember 2007 Agrahayana 1929
December 2008 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
January 2011 Magha 1932
March 2012 Phalguna 1933
April 2013 Chaitra 1935
March 2014 Phalguna 1935
January 2015 Magha 1936PD 10T MJ© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006````` 45.00Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermarkPublished at the Publication Divisionby the Secretary, National Council ofEducational Research and Training,Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016and printed at Gopsons Papers Limited,A-2 & 3, Sector-64, Noida 201 301 (UP)ISBN  81-7450-533-4ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDqNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrievalsystem or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way oftrade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of withoutthe publisher™s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
that in which it is published.qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on thispage, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a stickeror by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATIONDIVISION, NCERTNCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.NavjivanAhmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869Publication TeamHead, Publication:N. K. GuptaDivisionChief Editor:Shveta UppalChief Business:Gautam GangulyManagerChief Production:Arun ChitkaraOfficer (Incharge)Production Officer:Vikas B. MeshramCoverShweta Rao
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends thatchildren™s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learningwhich continues to shape our system and causes a gap between theschool, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed onthe basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. Theyalso attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharpboundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measureswill take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principalsand teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We mustrecognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate newknowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is oneof the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treatchildren as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body ofknowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and modeof functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour
in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number ofteaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used forteaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbookproves for making children™s life at school a happy experience, ratherthan a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried toaddress the problem of curricular burden by restructuring andreorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration forchild psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbookattempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and spaceto opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in smallgroups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committeeresponsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of theadvisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and theChief Advisor for this book, Professor Yogendra Singh for guiding thework of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development
of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making thispossible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations whichhave generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the NationalMonitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under theChairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande,for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committedto systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of itsproducts, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enableus to undertake further revision and refinement.DirectorNew DelhiNational Council of  Educational20 December 2005Research and Trainingiv
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEECHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOKS AT THE HIGHERSECONDARY LEVELHari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Kolkata,KolkataCHIEF ADVISORYogendra Singh, Emeritus Porfessor, Centre for the Study of  Social Systems,Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERSAnjan Ghosh, Fellow, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, KolkataArshad Alam, Lecturer, Centre for Jawaharlal Nehru Studies, Jamia MiliaIslamia, New DelhiArvind Chouhan, Professor, Department of Sociology, Barkatullah University,Bhopal
Debal Singh Roy, Professor, Department of Sociology, Indira Gandhi NationalOpen University, New DelhiDinesh Kumar Sharma, Professor (Retd.), NCERT, New DelhiJitendra Prasad, Professor, Department of Sociology, Maharshi DayanandUniversity, RohtakM.N. Karna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Sociology, North Eastern HillUniversity, Shillong
Maitrayee Chaudhuri, Professor, Centre for the Study of Social Systems,Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Manju Bhatt, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences,NCERT, New DelhiPushpesh Kumar, Doctoral Fellow, Institute of Economic Growth, Universityof Delhi, Delhi
Rajesh Mishra, Professor, Department of Sociology, Lucknow University,LucknowRajiv Gupta, Professor (Retd.), Department of Sociology, University ofRajasthan, Jaipur
S. Srinivasa Rao, Assistant Professor, Zakir Husain Centre for EducationalStudies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Satish Deshpande, Professor, Department of Sociology, University of Delhi,Delhi
Soumendra Mohan Patnayak, Professor, Department of Anthropology,University of Delhi, Delhi
Subhangi Vaidya, Assistant Director, Regional Service Division, Indira GandhiNational Open University, New DelhiMEMBER-COORDINATORSarika Chandrawanshi Saju, Assistant Professor, Department of Educationin Social Sciences, NCERT, New Delhivi
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledgesKaruna Chanana, Professor (Retd.), Zakir Husain Centre for EducationalStudies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Abha Awasthi, Professor(Retd.), Department of Sociology, Lucknow University, Lucknow; Madhu Nagla,
Lecturer, Department of Sociology, Mahrishi Dayanand University, Rohtak;Disha Nawani, Lecturer,  Gargi College, New Delhi; Vishvaraksha, Lecturer,Department of Sociology, University of Jammu, Jammu; Sudershan Gupta,
Lecturer, Govertment Higher Secondary School, Paloura, Jammu;  MandeepChaudhary, PGT Sociology, Guru Harkishan Public School, New Delhi;Rita Khanna, PGT Sociology, Delhi Public School, New Delhi; Seema Banerjee,PGT Sociology, Laxman Public School, New Delhi; Madhu Sharan, ProjectDirector, Hand-in-Hand, Chennai; Balaka Dey, Programme Associate, UnitedNations Development Programme, New Delhi; Niharika Gupta, Freelance Editor,New Delhi; Jesna Jayachandaran, Research Scholar, Jawaharlal NehruUniversity, New Delhi  for providing their feedback and inputs.Acknowledgements are due to Savita Sinha, former Professor and Head,Department of Education in Social Sciences for her support.The Council expresses gratitude to Jan Breman and Parthiv Shah for usingphotographs from their book, Working in the mill no more, published by OxfordUniversity Press, Delhi. Some photographs were taken from the Department of
Tourism, Government of India, New Delhi; National Museum, New Delhi; TheTimes of India, The Hindu, Outlook and Frontline. The Council thanks the authors,copyright holders and publishers of these reference materials. The Council
also acknowledges the Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, New Delhi for allowing  to use photographs available in their
photo library. Some photographs were given by John Suresh Kumar, SynodicalBoard of Social Service; J. John of Labour File, New Delhi; V. Suresh Chennaiand R.C. Das of Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT, New Delhi.The Council acknowledges their contribution.Special thanks are due to Vandana R. Singh, Consultant Editor, NCERT forgoing through the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Mamta, DTP Operator; Shreshtha, Proof Reader and Dinesh Kumar,  Incharge, ComputerStation in shaping this book. We are also grateful to Publication Department,NCERT for all their support.
A NOTE TO THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTSThis book is an introductory invitation to sociology. It is not meant to be acomprehensive and exhaustive account of the discipline. Instead it seeks
to give a sense of what sociology does and how it helps us understand both
society and our own lives better. The book hopes to familiarise studentswith the sociological perspective, its concepts and tools of research. It seeks
to show how sociology as a discipline engages with the fact that each of us,
as members of society have commonsensical ideas and understandings
about society. How is sociology as a body of knowledge distinguishable from
the body of common sense knowledge that necessarily exists in society? Is
it distinguishable by its method and approach? Is it different because it
continuously asks critical questions, because it accepts nothing as taken
for granted?We could keep adding many more such questions. For sociology is asubject that trains us to question and understand why and how society
functions the way it does. And hence there is a need to be clear about the
terms and concepts that sociology uses, for they are necessary tools in oursociological understanding.Apart from the critical perspective that sociology entails, it is also markedby diverse and contending approaches. This plurality is its strength. Thedifferent views within sociology about society can be fruitfully understood
as debates. Debates often help us understand a phenomena better.In keeping with the questioning and plural spirit of sociology, the bookcontinuously engages with the reader to think and reflect, to relate what is
happening to society and to us as individuals. The activities built into the
text are therefore an intrinsic part of the book. The text and activities
constitute an integrative whole. One cannot be done without the other. Forthe objective here is not just to provide ready made information about society
but to understand society.Society itself is plural, diverse and unequal. The book seeks to capturethis complexity in each of the chapters. Both examples and activities seek
to bring this in. The activities are therefore, essential part of the text. Yetlike all books, this is just a beginning. And much of the most exciting learning
process will take place in the classroom. Students and teachers will perhaps
think of far better ways, activities and examples and suggest how textbookscan be bettered.
CONTENTSFOREWORDiiiA NOTE TO THE TEACHER AND STUDENTSviii1.SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIETY12.TERMS, CONCEPTS AND THEIR USE IN SOCIOLOGY243.UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS404.CULTURE AND SOCIALISATION635.DOING SOCIOLOGY: RESEARCH METHODS82

