 63CULTURE AND SOCIALISATIONIINTRODUCTION‚Culture™, like ‚society™, is a term usedfrequently and sometimes vaguely.This chapter is meant to help us defineit more precisely and to appreciate
its different aspects. In everydayconversation, culture is confined to thearts, or alludes to the way of life of
certain classes or even countries.Sociologists and anthropologists studythe social contexts within which culture
exists. They take culture apart to tryand understand the relations betweenits various aspects.Just like you need a map tonavigate over unknown space or
territory, you need culture to conduct
or behave yourself in society.€ Cultureis the common understanding, whichis learnt and developed through social
interaction with others in society.€€Acommon understanding within a groupdemarcates it from others and gives it
an identity.€ But cultures are neverfinished products.€ They are alwayschanging and evolving.€ Elements areconstantly being added, deleted,
expanded, shrunk and rearranged.€
This makes cultures dynamic asfunctioning units.The capacity of individuals todevelop a common understanding withothers and to draw the same meaningsfrom signs and symbols is whatdistinguishes humans from otheranimals.€ Creating meaning is a socialvirtue as we learn it in the company ofCHAPTER 4CULTURE AND SOCIALISATIONActivity 1How do you greet another person inyour ‚culture™? Do you greet differentkinds of persons (friends, olderrelatives, the other gender, peoplefrom other groups) differently?
Discuss any awkward experience
you may have had when you did notknow how you should greet aperson. Is that because you did notshare a common ‚culture™? But nexttime round you will know what todo. Your cultural knowledge therebyexpands and rearranges itself.
 64INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYothers in families, groups andcommunities.€ We learn the use of toolsand techniques as well as the non-
material signs and symbols throughinteraction with family members,friends and colleagues in differentsocial settings.€ Much of this knowledgeis systematically described andconveyed either orally or throughbooks.€For example, notice the interactionbelow. Notice how words and facialexpressions convey meaning in aconversation.social set up like in villages, towns and
cities.€ In different environments, peopleadapt different strategies to cope withthe natural and social conditions.€ Thisleads to the emergence of diverse waysof life or cultures.€Disparities in coping mechanismswere evident during the devastatingtsunami of 26 December 2004, whichaffected some parts of the Tamil Naduand Kerala coast as well as the Andamanand Nicobar Islands in India.€ People onthe mainland and islands are integratedinto a relatively modern way of life. TheThis learning prepares us forcarrying out our roles andresponsibilities in society. You havealready dealt with status and roles.
What we learn in the family is primarysocialisation, while that which happensin school and other institutions aresecondary socialisation.€We shalldiscuss this in greater detail later in this
chapter.IIDIVERSE SETTINGS, DIFFERENT CULTURESHumans live in a variety of naturalsettings like in the mountains andplains, in forests and clear lands, indeserts and river valleys, in islands andmain lands.€ They also inhabit differentfisherfolk and the service personnel in the
islands were caught unaware andsuffered large scale devastation andmuch loss of life.€ On the other hand, the‚primitive™ tribal communities in the
islands like the Onges, Jarawas, GreatAndamanese or Shompens who had noaccess to modern science and technology,foresaw the calamity based on theirexperiential knowledge and savedthemselves by moving on to higherground.€ This shows that having accessto modern science and technology doesnot make modern cultures superior tothe tribal cultures of the islands. Hence,
cultures cannot be ranked but can bejudged adequate or inadequate interms of their ability to cope with thestrains imposed by nature.Commuter asks autodriver: ﬁIndiranagar?ﬂ The verb that conveys the questionŠﬁBartheera?ﬂ or ﬁWill you come?ﬂ Š is implied in the arch of the eyebrow. Driverjerks his head in the direction of the back seat if the answer is ﬁYesﬂ. If it is ﬁNoﬂ(which is more likely the case as every true blue Bangalorean knows) he mightjust drive away or grimace as if he has heard a bad word or shake his head with
a smile that seems to suggest a ﬁSorryﬂ, all depending on the mood of the moment.
