 40INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYCHAPTER 3UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL INSTITUTIONSIINTRODUCTIONThis book began with a discussionabout the interaction of the individual
and society. We saw that each of us asindividuals, occupies a place or
location in society. Each one of us has
a status and a role or roles, but these
are not simply what we as individualschoose. They are not like roles a filmactor may or may not opt to do. There
are social institutions that constrain and
control, punish and reward. They could
be ‚macro™ social institutions like the
state or  ‚micro™ ones like the family.
Here in this chapter we are introduced
to social institutions, and also to how
sociology/social anthropology studies
them. This chapter puts forth a very
brief idea of some of the central areas
where important social institutions arelocated namely: (i) family, marriage andkinship; (ii) politics; (iii) economics;
(iv) religion; and (v) education.In the broadest sense, aninstitution is something that works
according to rules established or atleast acknowledged by law or by
custom. And whose regular andcontinuous operation cannot beunderstood without taking those rulesinto account. Institutions imposeconstraints on individuals. They alsoprovide him/her with opportunities.An institution can also be viewed asan end in itself. Indeed people haveviewed family, religion, state or eveneducation as an end in itself.We have already seen that  thereare conflicting and differentunderstandings of concepts withinsociology. We have also been introducedto the functionalist and conflict
perspective, and seen how differently
they saw the same thing, for instance,stratification or social control. Notsurprisingly, therefore, there are
different forms of understanding of
social institutions as well.Activity 1Think of examples of how peoplesacrifice for family, for religion or for
the state.
 41UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL INSTITUTIONSA functionalist view understandssocial institutions as a complex set ofsocial norms, beliefs, values and role
relationship that arise in response tothe needs of society. Social institutionsexist to satisfy social needs. Accordingly
we find informal and formal social
institutions in societies.  Institutionssuch as family and religion areexamples of informal social institutions
while law and (formal) education are
formal social institutions.A conflict view holds that allindividuals are not placed equally in
society. All social institutions whether
familial, religious, political, economic,legal or educational will operate in theinterest of the dominant sections of
society be it class, caste, tribe or gender.The dominant social section not only
dominates political and economicinstitutions but also ensures that theruling class ideas become the ruling
ideas of a society. This is very different
from the idea that there are generalneeds of a society.As you go about reading thischapter, see whether you can thinkof examples to show how social
institutions constrain and also offeropportunities to individuals. Notice
whether they impact different sections
of society unequally.  For instance, wecould ask, ﬁHow does the familyconstrain as well provide opportunities
to men and women?ﬂ Or ﬁHow do
political or legal institutions affect theprivileged and dispossessed?ﬂIIFAMILY, MARRIAGE AND KINSHIPPerhaps no other social entity appearsmore ‚natural™ than the family. Often we
are prone to assume that all families are
like the ones we live in. No other social
institution appears more universal and
unchanging. Sociology and social
anthropology have over many decades,
conducted field research across
cultures to show how the institutions
of family, marriage and kinship are
important in all societies and yet theircharacter is different in differentsocieties. They have also shown how the
family (the private sphere) is linked to
economic, political, cultural and
educational (the public) spheres. This
may remind you of why there is a need
to share and borrow from different
disciplines, which we have discussed in
Chapter 1.According to the functionalists thefamily performs important tasks, which
contribute to society™s basic needs andhelps perpetuate social order. Thefunctionalist perspective argues thatmodern industrial societies function
best if women look after the family and
men earn the family livelihood. In India
studies however suggest that families
need not become nuclear in an
industrial pattern of economy (Singh
1993: 83). This is but one example to
show how trends based on experiences
of one society cannot necessarily be
generalised.The nuclear family is seen as theunit best equipped to handle thedemands of industrial society by the
