 24INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYCHAPTER 2TERMS, CONCEPTS AND THEIR USE IN SOCIOLOGYIINTRODUCTIONThe previous chapter introduced us toan idea both about society as well associology. We saw that a central task ofsociology is to explore the interplay of
society and the individual. We also sawthat individuals do not float freely in
society but are part of collective bodies
like the family, tribe, caste, class,  clan,
nation. In this chapter, we move furtherto understand the kinds of groups
individuals form, the kinds of unequal
orders, stratification systems within
which, individuals and groups areplaced, the way social control operates,
the roles that individuals have and play,and the status they occupy.In other words we start exploringhow society itself functions. Is itharmonious or conflict ridden? Are
status and roles fixed? How is social
control exercised? What kinds ofinequalities exist? The question howeverremains as to why do we need specificterms and concepts to understand this.Why does sociology need to have aspecial set of terms when we use termslike status and roles or social controlanyway in our everyday life?For a discipline such as, say,nuclear physics that deals with mattersunknown to most people and for whichno word exists in common speech, itseems obvious that a discipline mustdevelop a terminology. However,terminology is possibly even more
important for sociology, just becauseits subject matter is familiar and justbecause words do exist to denote it.  Weare so well acquainted with the social
institutions that surround us that wecannot see them clearly and precisely(Berger 1976:25).For example we may feel that sincewe live in families we know all aboutfamilies. This would be conflating orequating sociological knowledgewith common sense knowledge ornaturalistic explanation, which we havediscussed in Chapter 1.We also found in the previouschapter how sociology as a discipline
 25TERMS, CONCEPTS AND THEIR USE IN SOCIOLOGYhas a biography or history. We saw howcertain material and intellectualdevelopments shaped the sociologicalperspective as well as its concerns.Likewise sociological concepts too havea story to tell. Many of the conceptsreflect the concern of social thinkers tounderstand and map the socialchanges that the shift from pre-modernto modern entailed. For instancesociologists observed that simple, smallscale and traditional societies weremore marked by close, often face-to-face interaction. And modern, largescale societies by formal interaction.They therefore distinguished primaryfrom secondary groups, communityfrom society or association. Otherconcepts like stratification reflect theconcern that sociologists had inunderstanding the structured
inequalities between groups in society.Concepts arise in society. Howeverjust as there are different kinds ofindividuals and groups in society sothere are different kinds of concepts andideas. And sociology itself is marked bydifferent ways of understanding societyand looking at dramatic social changesthat the modern period brought about.We have seen how even in the earlystage of sociology™s emergence therewere contrary and contestingunderstandings of society. If forKarl Marx class and conflict were keyconcepts to understand society, socialsolidarity and collective consciencewere key terms for Emile Durkheim. Inthe Post-World War II period sociologywas greatly influenced by the structural
functionalists who found societyessentially harmonious. They found it
useful to compare society to anorganism where different parts have afunction to play for the maintenance ofthe whole. Others, in particular theconflict theorists influenced by Marxismsaw society as essentially conflictridden.Within sociology some tried tounderstand human behaviour bystarting with the individual, i.e. microinteraction. Others began with macrostructures such as class, caste, market,state or even community. Conceptssuch as status and role begin with theindividual.  Concepts such as socialcontrol or stratification begin from alarger context within which individualsare already placed.The important point is that theseclassifications and types that wediscuss in sociology help us and are thetools through which we canunderstand reality. They are keys toopen locks to understand society. Theyare entry points in our understanding,not the final answer. But what if the keybecomes rusted or bent or does not fit
the lock, or fits in with effort? In suchsituations we need to change or modifythe key. In sociology we both use andalso constantly interrogate or questionthe concepts and categories.Very often there is considerableunease about the coexistence ofdifferent kinds of definitions or conceptsor even just different views about thesame social entity. For example conflicttheory versus the functionalist theory.This multiplicity of approaches isparticularly acute in sociology. And it
 26INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYIISOCIAL GROUPS AND SOCIETYSociology is the study of human sociallife. A defining feature of human life isthat humans interact, communicate
and construct social collectivities. Thecomparative and historical perspectiveof sociology brings home two appa-rently innocuous facts. The first that inevery society whether ancient or feudal
or modern, Asian or European orAfrican human groups and collectivitiesexist. The second that the types ofgroups and collectivities are different indifferent societies.Any gathering of people does notnecessarily constitute a social group.
Aggregates are simply collections ofpeople who are in the same place at thesame time, but share no definiteconnection with one another.Passengers waiting at a railway stationor airport or bus stop or a cinemaaudience are examples of aggregates.Such aggregates are often termed asquasi groups.What kind of groups are these?cannot but be otherwise. For societyitself is diverse.In our discussion on the variousterms you will notice how there isdivergence of views. And how this verydebate and discussion of differences
helps us understand society.Activity 1Choose any one of the following
topics for class discussion:democracy is a help or hind-rance to developmentgender equality makes for a
more harmonious or moredivisive societypunishments or greater dis-
cussion are the best way toresolve conflicts.Think of other topics.What kind of differences emerged?Do they reflect different visions of
what a good society ought to be like?Do they reflect different notions ofthe human being?
 27TERMS, CONCEPTS AND THEIR USE IN SOCIOLOGYA quasi group is an aggregate orcombination, which lacks structure ororganisation, and whose membersmay be unaware, or less aware, of theexistence of groupings. Social classes,status groups, age and gender groups,crowds can be seen as examples ofquasi groups. As these examplessuggest quasi groups may wellbecome social groups in time and inspecific circumstances. For example,individuals belonging to a particular
social class or caste or community maynot be organised as a collective body.They may be yet to be infused with asense of ﬁweﬂ feeling. But class andcaste have over a period of time givenrise to political parties. Likewise
people of different communities inIndia have over the long anti-colonialstruggle developed an identity as a
collectivity and groupŠa nation witha shared past and a common future.
The women™s movement brought aboutthe idea of women™s groups andorganisation. All these examples drawattention to how social groups emerge,change and get modified.A social group can be said to haveat least the following characteristics:(i)persistent interaction to providecontinuity;(ii)a stable pattern of these inter-actions;(iii)a sense of belonging to identify
with other members, i.e. each
individual is conscious of the
group itself and its own set ofrules, rituals and symbols;(iv)shared interest;(v)acceptance of common norms andvalues;(vi)a definable structure.Social structure here refers topatterns of regular and repetitive
interaction between individuals or
groups. A social group thus refers to a
collection of continuously interacting
persons who share common interest,
culture, values and norms within agiven society.Activity 2Find out a name that is relevant under each heading.CasteAn anti caste movementA caste based political partyClassA class based movementA class based political partyWomenA women™s movementA women™s organisationTribeA tribal movementA tribe/tribes based political partyVillagersAn environmental movementAn environmental organisationDiscuss whether they were all social groups to start with and if some were not,then at what point can one apply the term social group to them, using the termas sociologically understood.
