UNDERSTANDING SOCIETYTEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XI

UNDERSTANDING SOCIETYTEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XI
First EditionAugust 2006  Ashvin 1927ReprintedNovember 2006 Kartika 1928December 2007 Agrahayana 1929
June 2009 Asadha 1931January 2010 Magha 1931January 2011 Magha 1932August 2012 Shravana 1934November 2013 Kartika 1935
January 2015  Magha 1936PD 10T MJ© National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, 2006``
``
` 45.00Printed on 80 GSM paper withNCERT watermarkPublished at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, SriAurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016and printed at Pankaj Printing Press,D-28, Industrial Area, Site-A,
Mathura (Uttar Pradesh)ISBN  81-7450-111-6ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDqNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrievalsystem or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the priorpermission of the publisher.qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of withoutthe publisher™s consent, in any form of binding or cover other thanthat in which it is published.qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page,
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by anyother means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.Publication TeamHead, Publication:N.K. GuptaDivisionChief Editor:Shveta UppalChief Business:Gautam GangulyManager
Chief Production:Arun ChitkaraOfficer (Incharge)Production Assistant:Prakash Veer SinghCoverAmit SrivastavaOFFICES OF THE PUBLICATIONDIVISION, NCERTNCERT CampusSri Aurobindo MargNew  Delhi 110 016Phone :  011-26562708108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangalore 560 085Phone : 080-26725740Navjivan Trust BuildingP.O.NavjivanAhmedabad 380 014Phone :  079-27541446CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihatiKolkata 700 114Phone :  033-25530454CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021Phone :  0361-2674869
FOREWORDThe National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends thatchildren™s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning whichcontinues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, homeand community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCFsignify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt todiscourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantlyfurther in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in
the National Policy on Education (1986).The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principalsand teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that,given space, time and freedom children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating theprescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating
creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children asparticipants in learning. Not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.These aims imply considerable change in school routines and modeof functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigourin implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used forteaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbookproves for making children™s life at school a happy experience, rather thana source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to addressthe problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting
knowledge at different stages with greater considertation for childpsychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts toenhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space toopportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in smallgroups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in Social Science, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisorfor this book, Professor Yogendra Singh for guiding the work of thiscommittee. Several teachers contributed to the development of thistextbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. Weare indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We areespecially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee,appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship ofProfessor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable timeand contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and
continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomescomments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake furtherrevision and refinement.DIRECTORNew DelhiNational Council of Educational20 December 2005Research and Trainingvi
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEECHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOKS AT THEHIGHER SECONDARY LEVELHari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Kolkata,KolkataCHIEF ADVISORYogendra Singh, Emeritus Professor, Centre for the Study of Social System,Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERSAbha Awasthi, Professor (Retd.), Department of Sociology, LucknowUniversity, LucknowAmita Baviskar, Reader, Institute of Economic Growth, University of DelhiAnjan Ghosh, Fellow, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, KolkataBalka Dey, Programme Associate, United Nations DevelopmentProgramme, New DelhiDisha Nawani, Lecturer, Gargi  College, New DelhiD.K. Sharma, Professor (Retd.), Department of Education in Social Sciences,NCERT, New DelhiJitendra Prasad, Professor. Department of Sociology, M.D. University,RohtakMadhu Nagla, Professor, Department of Sociology, M.D. University, RohtakMadhu Sharan, Project Director, Hand-in-Hand, ChennaiMaitrayee Choudhary, Professor, Centre for the Study of Social Systems,Jawaharlal Nehru University, New DelhiRajiv Gupta, Professor (Retd.), Department of Sociology, University ofRajasthan, JaipurSarika Chandrawanshi Saju, Assistant Professor, Department ofEducation in Social Sciences and Humanities, NCERT
Satish Deshpande, Professor, Department of Sociology, University of Delhi,DelhiVishwa Raksha, Associate Professor, Department of Sociology, Universityof Jammu, JammuMEMBER-COORDINATORManju Bhatt, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences,NCERT, New Delhiviii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledgesKaruna Chanana, Professor (Retd.), Zakir Husain Centre for EducationStudies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Arvind Chouhan,Professor, Department of Sociology, Barkatullah University, Bhopal;Debal Singh Roy, Professor, Department of Sociology, Indira GandhiNational Open University, New Delhi; Rajesh Mishra, Professor, Departmentof Sociology, Lucknow University, Lucknow; S.M. Patnayak, Professor,Department of Anthropology, University of Delhi, Delhi; Sudershan Gupta,
Lecturer, Government Higher Secondary School, Paloura, Jammu;Mandeep Choudhary, PGT, Sociology, Guru Hari Kishan Public School,New Delhi; Seema Banarjee, PGT, Sociology, Laxman Public School,New Delhi; Rita Kanna, PGT, Sociology, Delhi Public School, New Delhi forproviding their feedback and inputs.Acknowledgements are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head (Retd.),Department of Education in Social Sciences for her help and support.The Council expresses its gratitude to Press Information Bureau,Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India; V. Suresh,PGT, Zoology, Sri Vidhya Matriculation Higher Secondary School, Uttangari,Tamil Nadu; and L. Chakravarthy, Photographer, Uttangari, Tamil Nadu,for using their photographs in the textbook. Different photographs were
also provided by R.C. Das, Photographer, CIET, NCERT. Council alsoacknowledges his contribution. Some photographs were taken from thedifferent issues of Business and Economy, Business World and BusinessToday magazines. The Council thanks the copyright holders and publishersof these magazines.The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions ofMathew John, Proof Reader  and Uttam Kumar, DTP operator and otherstaff members of the Publication Department, NCERT for their supportin bringing out this textbook.

A NOTE TO THE TEACHER AND STUDENTSIn the earlier book our task was to introduce sociology. We had thusdiscussed the emergence of sociology, the key concerns of the discipline,its tools and methods of studying society. A central concern of sociology inits attempt to understand society was to understand the relationshipbetween the individual and society. To what extent is the individual free toact and to what extent is the individual constrained?In this book we seek to understand this relationship better by exploringthe concepts of social structure, social stratification and social processes.
We try and understand how groups and individuals are located within thesocial structure. And how they act and initiate social processes. How do
they cooperate, compete and conflict? Why do they cooperate, compete andconflict differently in different kinds of society? Proceeding with the basic
questioning approach of sociology dealt with in the earlier book we do notsee these processes as natural and unchanging. But as socially constituted.We do not accept a naturalist explanation that may suggest that humanbeings are ‚naturally™ competitive or ‚naturally™ prone to conflict.The concepts social structure and social processes draw attention tothe fact that society is marked both by order and change. Some things remainthe same. Some things change. A look at order and change in rural and urbansocieties help us look at these continuities and changes better.We then proceed further to look at the fundamental relationship betweensociety and the environment. And drawing from contemporary
developments, attempt a sociological understanding of our environment.In the earlier book we had dealt with the emergence of sociology and itsattempt to understand modernity. Here, we are introduced to some of thekey concepts that western and Indian thinkers developed to understandthe structures and processes of modern societies. The idea is not to deal
exhaustively with all their ideas, which would be impossible within the timeand space available. But to focus on only some aspect of their work andhopefully communicate some sense of the richness of the ideas that thethinkers were engaging with. For instance we look at Karl Marx™s ideas onclass conflict, Emile Durkheim™s ideas on division of labour and Max Weber™son bureaucracy. Likewise we look at G.S. Ghurye™s ideas on race and caste,D.P. Mukerji™s ideas on tradition and change and A.R. Desai™s on the stateand M.N. Srinivas™ on the village.
In keeping with the questioning spirit of sociology, this book like theearlier one continuously engages with the reader to think and reflect, torelate what is happening to society and to us as individuals. The activitiesbuilt into the text are therefore an intrinsic part of the book. The text andactivities constitute an integrative whole. One cannot be done without theother. For the objective here is not just to provide ready made informationto be learnt but to understand society. The dates that mark the life and worksof the thinkers have been included only to provide a broad sense of thehistorical context of the thinkers.This book tries to be interactive and introduces various activities thatmay help students engage with understanding society in a live manner.However, the most exciting and innovative part rests with the teachers andstudents. They will perhaps be able to introduce far more apt activities and
examples. Indeed the idea is to initiate the interactive debate. This is just abeginning. And much of the most exciting learning process will take placein the classroom. Students and teachers will perhaps think of far betterways, activities and examples. And suggest how textbooks can be bettered.xii
CONTENTSFOREWORD(v)A NOTE TO THE TEACHER AND STUDENTS(xi)1.SOCIAL STRUCTURE, STRATIFICATION AND1SOCIAL PROCESSES IN SOCIETY2.SOCIAL CHANGE AND SOCIAL ORDER22IN RURAL AND URBAN SOCIETY3.ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETY504.INTRODUCING WESTERN SOCIOLOGISTS665.INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTS83
Constitution of IndiaFundamental DutiesIt shall be the duty of every citizen of India Š(a)to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, theNational Flag and the National Anthem;(b)to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;(c)to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;(d)to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;(e)to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional orsectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity ofwomen;(f)to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;(g)to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;(h)to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry andreform;(i)to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;(j)to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavourand achievement;*(k)who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.Note:The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from1 April 2010).Part IV A (Article 51 A)
