CHAPTER 3ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYLook around you. What do you see? Ifyou are in a classroom, you may seestudents in uniform, sitting on chairs
with books open on their desk.  Thereare school bags with lunch and pencilboxes.  Ceiling fans might be whirringoverhead.  Have you ever thoughtabout where these things Š school
clothes, furniture, bags, electricity,come from?  If you trace their origins,you will find that the source of each
material object lies in nature.  Everyday, we use objects whose productiondraws upon natural resources fromaround the world.  The chair in yourclassroom may be made from wood
with iron nails, glue and varnish.  Itsjourney from a tree in a forest orplantation to you depends onelectricity, diesel, facilities for trade,and telecommunications.  Along the
way, it has passed through the handsof loggers, carpenters, supervisors andmanagers, transporters, traders andthose in charge of buying schoolfurniture.  These producers and
distributors, and the inputs that theyprovide into chair manufacturing, inturn use a variety of goods andservices derived from nature.  Try andmap these resource flows and you willsoon see how complex suchrelationships are!In this chapter, we will study socialrelationships with the environment as
they have changed over time and asthey vary from place to place.  It isimportant to analyse and interpret
such variations in a systematic way.There are many urgent environmentalproblems that demand our attention.
To address these crises effectively, weneed a sociological framework forunderstanding why they occur andhow they might be prevented orresolved.All societies have an ecologicalbasis.  The term ecology denotes theweb of physical and biological systemsand processes of which humans areone element.  Mountains and rivers,
plains and oceans, and the flora andfauna that they support, are a part ofecology.  The ecology of a place is alsoaffected by the interaction between itsgeography and hydrology. For
example, the plant and animal lifeunique to a desert is adapted to itsscarce rainfall, rocky or sandy soils,and extreme temperatures. Similar
51ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYecological factors limit and shape howhuman beings can live in any
particular place.Over time, however, ecology hasbeen modified by human action.What appears to be a natural featureof the environment Š aridity or flood-
proneness, for example, is oftenproduced by human intervention.Deforestation in the upper catchmentof a river may make the river moreflood-prone.  Climate change brought
about by global warming is anotherinstance of the widespread impact ofhuman activity on nature.  Over time,it is often difficult to separate anddistinguish between the natural and
human factors in ecological change.Activity 1Did you know that the Ridge forest inDelhi is not the natural vegetation ofthis region but was planted by theBritish around 1915?  Its dominant
tree species is Prosopis juliflora(vilayati kikar or vilayati babul) whichwas introduced into India from SouthAmerica and which has becomenaturalised all over north India.
Did you know that the chaurs,the wide grassy meadows of Corbett
National Park in Uttaranchal whichoffer excellent views of wildlife, wereonce agricultural fields?  Villages in
the area were relocated in order tocreate what now appears to be apristine wilderness.Can you think of other exampleswhere what seems to be ‚natural™ is
actually modified by culturalinterventions?Alongside biophysical propertiesand processes that may have beentransformed by human action Š forexample, the flow of a river and thespecies composition of a forest, thereare other ecological elements aroundus that are more obviously human-
made. An agricultural farm with itssoil and water conservation works, itscultivated plants and domesticatedanimals, its inputs of syntheticfertilisers and pesticides, is clearly a
human transformation of nature.  Thebuilt environment of a city, made fromconcrete, cement, brick, stone, glassand tar, uses natural resources but isvery much a human artefact.Social environments emerge fromthe interaction between biophysical
ecology and human interventions.This is a two-way process. Just asnature shapes society, society shapes
nature. For instance, the fertile soil ofthe Indo-Gangetic floodplain enablesintensive agriculture. Its highproductivity allows dense populationsettlements and generates enoughsurpluses to support other, non-agricultural activities, giving rise tocomplex hierarchical societies andstates. In contrast, the desert ofRajasthan can only support
pastoralists who move from place toplace in order to keep their livestocksupplied with fodder.  These areinstances of ecology shaping the formsof human life and culture. On the
other hand, the social organisation ofcapitalism has shaped nature acrossthe world. The private automobile isone instance of a capitalist commodity
 52UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYthat has transformed lives andlandscapes.  Air pollution and
congestion in cities, regional conflictsand wars over oil, and global warmingare just a few of the environmentaleffects of cars.  Human interventions
increasingly have the power to alterenvironments, often permanently.A damA small dam
53ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYThe ecological effects of theIndustrial Revolution in Britain were
felt all over the world.  Large areasof southern North America and theCaribbean were converted toplantations to meet the demand forcotton in the mills of Lancashire.
Young West Africans were forciblytransported to America to work asslave labour on the plantations.  Thedepopulation of West Africa causedits agricultural economy to decline,
with fields reverting to fallowwastelands.  In Britain, smoke fromthe coal-burning mills fouled the air.Displaced farmers and labourersfrom the countryside came to the
cities for work and lived in wretchedconditions.  The ecological footprintsof the cotton industry could be foundall over urban and rural
environments.The interaction betweenenvironment and society is shaped bysocial organisation. Propertyrelations determine how and by whomnatural resources can be used.  Forinstance, if forests are owned by thegovernment, it will have the power to
decide whether it should lease themto timber companies or allow villagersto collect forest produce. Privateownership of land and water sourceswill affect whether others can have
access to these resources and on whatterms and conditions.  Ownership andcontrol over resources is also relatedto the division of labour in theproduction process. Landless
labourers and women will have adifferent relationship with naturalresources than men. In rural India,women are likely to experience
resource scarcity more acutely
because gathering fuel and fetchingwater are generally women™s tasks butthey do not control these resources.Social organisation influences howdifferent social groups relate to their
environment.Different relationships betweenenvironment and society also reflect
different social values and norms, aswell as knowledge systems.  The
values underlying capitalism have
supported the commodification ofnature, turning it into objects that canbe bought and sold for profit.  For
instance, the multiple cultural
meanings of a river Š its ecological,utilitarian, spiritual, and aestheticsignificance, are stripped down to asingle set of calculations about profitand loss from the sale of water for anentrepreneure. Socialist values ofequality and justice have led to theseizure of lands from large landlordsand their redistribution among
landless peasants in a number of
countries.  Religious values have ledsome social groups to protect andconserve sacred groves and species
and others to believe that they havedivine sanction to change theenvironment to suit their needs.There are many differentperspectives on the environment
and its relationship to society.  These
differences include the ‚nature-
nurture™ debate and whetherindividual characteristics are innateor are influenced by environmental
factors.  For instance, are people poor
 54UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYbecause they are innately lesstalented or hard-working or because
they are born into a situation ofdisadvantage and lack ofopportunity?  Theories and dataabout environment and society areinfluenced by the social conditions
under which they emerge.  Thus thenotions that women are intrinsicallyless able than men, and Blacksnaturally less able than Whites, werechallenged as ideas of equality
became more widespread during the18th century™s social and politicalrevolutions.  Colonialism generated agreat deal of knowledge aboutenvironment and society, often
systematically compiling it in orderto make resources available to theimperial powers.  Geology, geography,botany, zoology, forestry andhydraulic engineering were among
the many disciplines that werecreated and institutionalised to
facilitate the management of naturalresources for colonial purposes.Environmental management is,however, a very difficult task.  Not
enough is known about biophysicalprocesses to predict and control them.In addition, human relations with theenvironment have become increasinglycomplex. With the spread of indu-strialisation, resource extraction hasexpanded and accelerated, affectingecosystems in unprecedented ways.Complex industrial technologies andmodes of organisation requiresophisticated management systemswhich are often fragile and vulnerableto error. We live in risk societies usingtechnologies and products that we donot fully grasp. The occurrence ofnuclear disasters like Chernobyl,industrial accidents like Bhopal, andMad Cow disease in Europe shows the
dangers inherent in industrialenvironments.Bhopal Industrial Disaster: Who was to Blame?On the night of 3 December 1984, a deadly gas spread through Bhopal, killingabout 4,000 people and leaving another 200,000 permanently disabled.  The gaswas later identified as methyl isocyanate (MIC), accidentally released by a UnionCarbide pesticide factory in the city.  In its State of India™s Environment: The SecondCitizens™ Report, the Centre for Science and Environment analysed the reasonsbehind the disaster:‚Union Carbide™s coming to Bhopal in 1977 was welcomed by all, because itmeant jobs and money for Bhopal, and saving in foreign exchange for the country,
with the rising demand for pesticides after the Green Revolution.  The MIC plantwas troublesome from the start and there were several leakages, including one thatcaused the death of a plant operator, until the big disaster.  However, the governmentsteadfastly ignored warnings, notably from the head of the Bhopal Municipal
Corporation who issued notice to Union Carbide to move out of Bhopal in 1975.The officer was transferred and the company donated Rs 25,000 to the Corporationfor a park.
55ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYMAJOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS AND RISKSAlthough the relative importance orurgency of different environmentalhazards may vary from country tocountry and context to context, thefollowing are globally recognized as the
main ones:A. Resource DepletionUsing up non-renewable naturalresources is one of the most seriousenvironmental problems.  While fossilfuels and specially petroleum hog theheadlines, the depletion anddestruction of water and land isprobably even more rapid.  The rapiddecline in groundwater levels is anacute problem all over India, especiallyin the states of Punjab, Haryana andUttar Pradesh.  Aquifers which haveaccumulated water over hundreds andthousands of years are being emptied
in matter of a few decades to meet theThe warnings kept coming.  In May 1982, three experts from the UnionCarbide Corporation, USA, surveyed safety measures and pointed out alarminglapses.  These fears were reported in a local weekly Rapat, in what was to be aseries of prophetic articles in 1982.  At the same time, the factory™s employeesunion also wrote to Central ministers and the chief minister warning them ofthe situation.  The state Labour Minister reassured legislators at several times
that the factory was safe.  Only a few weeks before the gas leak, the factory hadbeen granted an environmental clearance certificate by the state pollution controlboard.  The Central government rivalled its state counterpart in casualness.  Itignored the plant™s safety record in granting it permission and ignored Departmentof Environment guidelines on the siting of hazardous plants.Why the guidelines and warnings were ignored is clear.  The company employsthe relatives of powerful politicians and bureaucrats.  Its legal adviser is an
important political leader and its public relations officer is the nephew of a formerminister.  The company™s posh guesthouse was always at the disposal of politicians.The chief minister™s wife had reportedly received lavish hospitality from the company
during visits to the USA, and the company had donated Rs 1.5 lakh to a welfareorganisation in the chief minister™s home town.Union Carbide Corporation also played its full part in the run-up to the tragedy.The Bhopal plant was under-designed and lacked several safety features. It didnot have a computerised early warning system, a standard device in the company™sfactories in the US.  The company had not worked out emergency evacuationprocedures with the local community.  The plant was not being maintained and
operated at the requisite level of efficiency.  Morale was low because sales weredropping and the plant was running at a third of its capacity.  Staff strength hadbeen reduced and many engineers and operators had left, making it impossiblefor the existing staff to monitor all the tasks.  Many instruments were out of order.Discussion: Which social institutions and organisations play a role in industrial
accidents like the Bhopal disaster? What steps can be taken to prevent such
disasters?
 56UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYgrowing demands of intensiveagriculture, industry and urbancentres.  Rivers have also been
dammed and diverted, causing
irreversible damage to the ecology of
water basins.  Many water bodies inurban areas have been filled up andbuilt upon, destroying the natural
drainage of the landscape.  Like
groundwater, topsoil too is created
over thousands of years.  Thisagricultural resource, too, is beingdestroyed due to poor environmental
management leading to erosion,
water-logging and salinisation.  The
production of bricks for buildinghouses is another reason for the lossof topsoil.Biodiversity habitats such asforests, grasslands and wetlands arethe other major resource facing rapiddepletion, largely due to the expansionof areas under agriculture. Though
various parts of the globe, includingsome parts of India, appear to haveseen some re-forestation or increase invegetative cover in recent decades, theoverall trend is towards the loss ofbiodiversity. The shrinking of these
habitats has endangered many species,several of them unique to India. You
may have read of the recent crisis whenit was discovered that the tigerpopulation had fallen sharply despitestrict laws and large sanctuaries.B. PollutionAir pollution is considered to be a majorenvironmental problem in urban andrural areas, causing respiratory andDeforestation
57ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYother problems which result in seriousillness and death.  The sources of air
pollution include emissions fromindustries and vehicles, as well as theburning of wood and coal for domesticuse.  We have all heard of pollutionfrom vehicles and factories, and seen
pictures of smoking chimneys andexhaust pipes in cars.  But we oftendon™t realise that indoor pollution fromcooking fires is also a serious sourceHealth Organisation has estimatedthat almost 600,000 people died due
to (cumulative) indoor pollution relatedcauses in India in 1998, almost500,000 of them in rural areas.(Giddens 2004: 614, Table 19.1, takenfrom the Human Development Report,1998 of the United NationsDevelopment Programme, whichquotes the World Health Organisation
statistics.)of risk.  This is particularly true ofrural homes where wood fires using
green or poorly burning wood, badlydesigned fireplaces (chulhas), and poorventilation combine to put villagewomen at serious risk because they
do the cooking.  In fact, the WorldIndustrial PollutionWater pollution is also a veryserious issue affecting surface as wellas groundwater. Major sources includenot only domestic sewage and factory
effluents but also the runoff from
farms where large amounts ofsynthetic fertilisers and pesticides are
 58UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYused.  The pollution of rivers and waterbodies is a particularly importantproblem.Cities also suffer from noisepollution, which has been the subjectof court orders in many cities.  Sourcesinclude amplified loud speakers usedat religious and cultural events,political campaigns, vehicle horns andtraffic, and construction work.C. Global WarmingThe release of particular gases (carbondioxide, methane and others) createsa ‚greenhouse™ effect by trapping thesun™s heat and not allowing it todissipate.  This has caused a small but
significant rise in global temperatures.The resulting climate change isprojected to melt polar ice-fields andraise the sea level, thus submerginglow-lying coastal areas, and moreimportant, affecting the ecologicalbalance.  Global warming is also likelyto result in greater fluctuations anduncertainty in climates across theworld.  China and India are
increasingly significant contributors toworld carbon and green house gasemissions.D. Genetically Modified OrganismsNew techniques of gene-splicing allowscientists to import genes from onespecies into another, introducing newcharacteristics.  For instance, genesfrom Bacillus thuringiensis have beenintroduced into cotton species,
making it resistant to the bollworm,a major pest.  Genetic modificationmay also be done to shorten growingtime, increase size and the shelf-lifeSpraying pesticide in a brinjal field
59ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETYof crops.   However, little is knownabout the long term effects of genetic
modification on those who eat thesefoods or on ecological systems.Agricultural companies can also usegenetic modification to create sterileseeds, preventing farmers from re-
using them, and guaranteeing thatseeds remain their profit-yieldingproperty, forcing farmers to bedependent on them.E.Natural and Man
-made
 EnvironmentalDisastersThis is a self-explanatory category.The Bhopal disaster of 1984 when atoxic gas leak from the Union Carbidefactory there killed about 4000 people,
and the tsunami of 2004 are the mostrecent examples of man-made andnatural environmental disasters.WHY ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS ARE ALSOSOCIAL PROBLEMSHow environmental problems affectdifferent groups is a function of socialinequality.  Social status and powerdetermine the extent to which peoplecan insulate themselves from
environmental crises or overcome it.In some cases, their ‚solutions™ mayactually worsen environmentaldisparities.  In Kutch, Gujarat, wherewater is scarce, richer farmers have
invested in deep bore tubewells to tapgroundwater to irrigate their fields andgrow cash crops. When the rains fail,the earthen wells of the poorervillagers run dry and they do not even
have water to drink.  At such times,the moist green fields of the richfarmers seem to mock them.  Certainenvironmental concerns sometimes
appear to be universal concerns, notparticular to specific social groups.For instance, reducing air pollution orprotecting biodiversity seem to be inthe public interest.  A sociological
analysis shows, however, that howpublic priorities are set and how theyare pursued may not be universallybeneficial.  Securing the publicinterest may actually serve the
interests of particular politically andeconomically powerful groups, or hurtthe interests of the poor and politicallyweak.  As the debates over large damsand around protected areas show, the
environment as a public interest is ahotly contested arena.The school of social ecologypoints out that social relations, inparticular the organisation of property
and production, shape environmentalperceptions and practices. Differentsocial groups stand in differentrelationships to the environment andapproach it differently. A ForestDepartment geared to maximisingrevenues from supplying largevolumes of bamboo to the paperindustry will view and use a forest verydifferently from an artisan who
harvests bamboo to make baskets.Their varied interests and ideologiesgenerate environmental conflicts.  Inthis sense, environmental crises havetheir roots in social inequality.
Addressing environmental problemsrequires changing environment-society relations, and this in turnrequires efforts to change relations
 60UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYbetween different social groups Š menand women, urban and rural people,
landlords and labourers.  Changedsocial relations will give rise todifferent knowledge systems andmodes of managing the environment.What literally defines social ecologyas ﬁsocialﬂ is its recognition of theoften overlooked fact that nearly allour present ecological problems arisefrom deep-seated social problems.Conversely, present ecologicalproblems cannot be clearlyunderstood, much less resolved,
without resolutely dealing withproblems within society. To make thispoint more concrete: economic,ethnic, cultural, and gender conflicts,among many others, lie at the core of
the most serious ecologicaldislocations we face today Š apart,to be sure, from those that areproduced by natural catastrophes.Murray Bookchin, politicalphilosopher and founder of theInstitute for Social EcologyTwo examples of environment-society conflicts are given below:No Rain, but Snow and Water ParksWater-starved Vidharbha has agrowing number of water parks andamusement centres.Even when it™s 47 degrees in the restof the region, it™s cool here. A littleaway from us is a patch that clocks in
at minus 13 degrees. This is ﬁIndia™sfirst Snowdomeﬂ Š in burningVidharbha. Keeping its ice rink firmcosts Rs 4,000 a day in electricitycharges alone. Welcome to the Funand Food Village Water and
Amusement Park in Bazargaon grampanchayat of Nagpur (Rural) district.A portrait of Mahatma Gandhi greetsvisitors in the office of the hugecomplex. And you™re assured daily
disco, ice skating, ice sliding and ﬁawell stocked bar with cocktails.ﬂ The40-acre park itself offers 18 kinds ofwater slides and games. Also servicesfor events ranging from conferences to
kitty parties.The village of Bazargaon(population 3,000) itself faces a hugewater crisis. ﬁHaving to make manydaily trips for water, women walk up
to 15 km in a day to fetch it,ﬂ sayssarpanch Yamunabai Uikey. ﬁThiswhole village has just one sarkariwell. Sometimes, we have got wateronce in four or five days. Sometimes,
once in ten days.ﬂ Bazargaon falls ina region declared as scarcity-hit in2004. It had never faced that fatebefore. The village also had its shareof six-hour Š and worse Š power
cuts till about May. These hit everyaspect of daily life, including health,and devastated children appearingfor exams. The summer heat,touching 47, made things worse. All
these iron laws of rural life do notapply within Fun and Food Village.This private oasis has more waterthan Bazargaon can dream of. Andnever a moment™s break in power
supply. ﬁWe pay on average,ﬂ says MrSingh, General Manager of the Park,ﬁabout Rs 400,000 a month inelectricity bills.ﬂ
