CHAPTER 5INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTSAs you saw in the opening chapter ofyour first book, Introducing Sociology,the discipline is a relatively young oneeven in the European context, havingbeen established only about a centuryago.  In India, interest in sociologicalways of thinking is a little more than acentury old, but formal university
teaching of sociology only began in1919 at the University of Bombay.  Inthe 1920s, two other universities Š
those at Calcutta and Lucknow Š also
began programmes of teaching andresearch in sociology and anthropology.Today, every major university has adepartment of sociology, social
anthropology or anthropology, andoften more than one of these disciplinesis represented.Now-a-days sociology tends to be
taken for granted in India, like most
established things.  But this was notalways so.  In the early days, it wasnot clear at all what an Indian sociologywould look like, and indeed, whetherIndia really needed something like
sociology.  In the first quarter of the20th century, those who becameinterested in the discipline had todecide for themselves what role it couldplay in India.  In this chapter, you aregoing to be introduced to some of thefounding figures of Indian sociology.
These scholars have helped to shapethe discipline and adapt it to ourhistorical and social context.The specificity of the Indian contextraised many questions.  First of all, ifwestern sociology emerged as anattempt to make sense of modernity,what would its role be in a country like
India?  India, too, was of courseexperiencing the changes broughtabout by modernity but with animportant difference Š it was a colony.
The first experience of modernity in
India was closely intertwined with theexperience of colonial subjugation.Secondly, if social anthropology in thewest arose out of the curiosity felt byEuropean society about primitive
cultures, what role could it have inIndia, which was an ancient andadvanced civilisation, but which also
had ‚primitive™ societies within it?Finally, what useful role could sociology
have in a sovereign, independent  India,a nation about to begin its adventurewith planned development anddemocracy?
 84UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYThe pioneers of Indian sociologynot only had to find their own answersto questions like these, they also hadto formulate new questions forthemselves. It was only through theexperience of ‚doing™ sociology in anIndian context that the questions took
shape Š they were not available‚readymade™. As is often the case, inthe beginning Indians becamesociologists and anthropologistsmostly by accident. For example, one
of the earliest and best knownpioneers of social anthropology inIndia, L.K. Ananthakrishna Iyer(1861-1937), began his career as aclerk, moved on to become a school
teacher and later a college teacher inCochin state in present day Kerala.  In1902, he was asked by the Dewan ofCochin to assist with an ethnographicsurvey of the state.  The British
government wanted similar surveysdone in all the princely states as wellas the presidency areas directly underits control.  Ananthakrishna Iyer didthis work on a purely voluntary basis,working as a college teacher in theMaharajah™s College at Ernakulamduring the week, and functioning asthe unpaid Superintendent ofEthnography in the weekends. His
work was much appreciated by Britishanthropologists and administrators ofthe time, and later he was also invitedto help with a similar ethnographicsurvey in Mysore state.Ananthakrishna Iyer was probablythe first self-taught anthropologist to
receive national and internationalrecognition as a scholar and anacademician. He was invited to lectureat the University of Madras, and was
appointed as Reader at the Universityof Calcutta, where he helped set up thefirst post-graduate anthropology
department in India. He remained at
the University of Calcutta from 1917
to 1932.  Though he had no formalqualifications in anthropology, he waselected President of the Ethnologysection of the Indian Science Congress.He was awarded an honorary doctorate
by a German university during hislecture tour of European universities.He was also conferred the titles of RaoBahadur and Dewan Bahadur byCochin state.The lawyer Sarat Chandra Roy(1871-1942) was another ‚accidental
anthropologist™ and pioneer of thediscipline in India.  Before taking hislaw degree in Calcutta™s Ripon College,
Roy had done graduate and post-graduate degrees in English.  Soon afterhe had begun practising law, hedecided to go to Ranchi in 1898 to takeup a job as an English teacher at aChristian missionary school.  Thisdecision was to change his life, for heremained in Ranchi for the next forty-four years and became the leadingauthority on the culture and society of
the tribal peoples of the Chhotanagpurregion (present day Jharkhand). Roy™sinterest in anthropological mattersbegan when he gave up his school joband began practising law at the Ranchi
courts, eventually being appointed asofficial interpreter in the court.Roy became deeply interested intribal society as a byproduct of his
85INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTSprofessional need to interpret tribalcustoms and laws to the court.  He
travelled 
extensively among tribalcommunities and did intensivefieldwork among them.  All of this wasdone on an ‚amateur™ basis, but Roy™sdiligence and keen eye for detail
resulted in valuable monographs andresearch articles.  During his entirecareer, Roy published more than onehundred articles in leading Indian andBritish academic journals in addition
to his famous monographs on theOraon, the Mundas and the Kharias.Roy soon became very well knownamongst anthropologists in India andBritain and was recognised as an

authority on Chhotanagpur.  He
founded the journal Man in India in1922, the earliest journal of its kind in
India that is still published.Both Ananthakrishna Iyer andSarat Chandra Roy were true pioneers.
In the early 1900s, they beganpractis
ing a discipline that did not yetexist in India, and which had no
institutions to promote it.  Both Iyerand Roy were born, lived and 
died in
an India that was ruled by the British.

The four Indian sociologists you aregoing to be introduced in this chapter
were born one generation later than
Iyer and Roy.  They came of age in thecolonial era, but their careerscontinued into the era of independence,and they helped to shape the firstformal institutions that established
Indian sociology.  G.S. Ghurye and D.P.Mukerji were born in the 1890s whileA.R. Desai and M.N. Srinivas wereabout fifteen years younger, havingbeen born in the second decade of the20th century. Although they were all

deeply influenced by western traditionsof sociology, they were also able to offersome initial answers to the questionthat the pioneers could only begin toask :  what shape should a specifically

Indian sociology take?G.S. Ghurye can be considered thefounder of institutionalised sociologyin India. He headed India™s very firstpost-graduate teaching department of
Sociology at Bombay University forthirty-five years. He guided a largenumber of research scholars, many ofwhom went on to occupy prominentpositions in the discipline. He also
founded the Indian SociologicalSociety as well as its journalSociological Bulletin. His academicwritings were not only prolific, but very
wide-ranging in the subjects they
covered.  At a time when financial andinstitutional support for universityresearch was very limited, Ghuryemanaged to nurture sociology as anincreasingly Indian discipline.  Ghurye™sBombay University department was the
first to successfully implement two ofthe features which were laterenthusiastically endorsed by hissuccessors in the discipline.  These
were the active combining of teachingand research within the sameinstitution, and the merger of socialanthropology and sociology into acomposite discipline.Best known, perhaps, for hiswritings on caste and race, Ghurye also
wrote on a broad range of other themesincluding tribes; kinship, family and
 86UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYGovind Sadashiv Ghurye (1893-1983)G. S. Ghurye was born on 12 December 1893 in Malvan,a town in the Konkan coastal region of western India. Hisfamily owned a trading business which had once beenprosperous, but was in decline.1913:Joined Elphinstone College in Bombay withSanskrit Honours for the B.A. degree which he
completed in 1916.  Received the M.A. degree inSanskrit and English from the same college in 1918.1919:Selected for a scholarship by the University of
Bombay for training abroad in sociology.  Initially went to the LondonSchool of Economics to study with L.T. Hobhouse, a prominent sociologistof the time.  Later went to Cambridge to study with W.H.R. Rivers, andwas deeply influenced by his diffusionist perspective.1923:Ph.D. submitted under A.C. Haddon after River™s sudden death in 1922.
Returned to Bombay in May.  Caste and Race in India, the manuscriptbased on the doctoral dissertation, was accepted for publication in a majorbook series at Cambridge.1924:After brief stay in Calcutta, was appointed Reader and Head of theDepartment of Sociology at Bombay University in June.  He remained asHead of the Department at Bombay University for the next 35 years.1936:Ph.D. Programme was launched at the Bombay Department; the first Ph.D.in Sociology at an Indian university was awarded to G.R. Pradhan underGhurye™s supervision.  The M.A. course was revised and made a full-fledged8-course programme in 1945.1951:Ghurye established the Indian Sociological Society and became its foundingPresident. The journal of the Indian Sociological Society, Sociological Bulletinwas launched in 1952.1959:Ghurye retired 
from the University, but continued to be active in academiclife, particularly in terms of publication Š 17 of his 30 books were writtenafter retirement.G.S. Ghurye died in 1983, at the age of 90.marriage; culture, civilisation and thehistoric role of cities; religion; and thesociology of conflict and integration.Among the intellectual and contextualconcerns which influenced Ghurye, themost prominent are perhaps
diffusionism, Orientalist scholarshipon Hindu religion and thought,nationalism, and the cultural aspectsof Hindu identity.One of the major themes thatGhurye worked on was that of ‚tribal™or ‚aboriginal™ cultures.  In fact, it was
his writings on this subject, and
87INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTSspecially his debate with Verrier Elwinwhich first made him known outside
sociology and the academic world. Inthe 1930s and 1940s there was muchdebate on the place of tribal societieswithin India and how the state shouldrespond to them. Many British
administrator-anthropologists werespecially interested in the tribes ofIndia and believed them to be primitivepeoples with a distinctive culture farfrom mainstream Hinduism. They also
believed that the innocent and simpletribals would suffer exploitation andcultural degradation through contactwith Hindu culture and society. Forthis reason, they felt that the state
had a duty to protect the tribes andto help them sustain their way of lifeand culture, which were facingconstant pressure to assimilate with
mainstream Hindu culture. However,
nationalist Indians were equallypassionate about their belief in theunity of India and the need formodernising Indian society andculture. They believed that attemptsto preserve tribal culture weremisguided and resulted in maintainingtribals in a backward state as‚museums™ of primitive culture. Aswith many features of Hinduism itself
which they felt to be backward and inneed of reform, they felt that tribes,too, needed to develop. Ghuryebecame the best-known exponent ofthe nationalist view and insisted on
characterising the tribes of India as‚backward Hindus™ rather thandistinct cultural groups. He citeddetailed evidence from a wide varietyof tribal cultures to show that they hadbeen involved in constant interactions
with Hinduism over a long period.They were thus simply further behindin the same process of assimilationthat all Indian communities had gonethrough.  This particular argument Š
namely, that Indian tribals werehardly ever isolated primitivecommunities of the type that waswritten about in the classicalanthropological texts Š was not really
disputed.  The differences were in howthe impact of mainstream culture wasevaluated. The ‚protectionists™ believedthat assimilation would result in thesevere exploitation and cultural
extinction of the tribals.  Ghurye andthe nationalists, on the other hand,argued that these ill-effects were notspecific to tribal cultures, but werecommon to all the backward and
downtrodden sections of Indiansociety. These were the inevitabledifficulties on the road to development.Activity 1Today we still seem to be involved insimilar debates. Discuss the differentsides to the question from acontemporary perspective. Forexample, many tribal movementsassert their distinctive cultural and
political identity Š in fact, the statesof Jharkhand and Chhattisgarhwere formed in response tosuch movements. There is also amajor controversy around the
disproportionate burden that tribalcommunities have been forced tobear for the sake of developmental
 88UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYprojects like big dams, mines andfactories.  How many such conflicts
do you know about?  Find out whatthe issues are in these conflicts.What do you and your classmatesfeel should be done about theseproblems?Ghurye on Caste and RaceG.S. Ghurye™s academic reputationwas built on the basis of his doctoraldissertation at Cambridge, which waslater published as Caste and Race inIndia (1932). Ghurye™s work attractedattention because it addressed themajor concerns of Indian anthropologyat the time.  In this book, Ghuryeprovides a detailed critique of the thendominant theories about therelationship between race and caste.Herbert Risley, a British colonialofficial who was deeply interested inanthropological matters, was the mainproponent of the dominant view.  Thisview held that human beings can bedivided into distinct and separateraces on the basis of their physicalcharacteristics such as thecircumference of the skull, the lengthof the nose, or the volume (size) of thecranium or the part of the skull wherethe brain is located.Risley and others believed thatIndia was a unique ‚laboratory™ for
studying the evolution of racial typesbecause caste strictly prohibits inter-marriage among different groups, andhad done so for centuries.  Risley™smain argument was that caste musthave originated in race becausedifferent caste groups seemed tobelong to distinct racial types.  Ingeneral, the higher castesapproximated Indo-Aryan racial traits,while the lower castes seemed tobelong to non-Aryan aboriginal,Mongoloid or other racial groups.  Onthe basis of differences betweengroups in terms of averagemeasurements for length of nose, size
of cranium etc., Risley and otherssuggested that the lower castes werethe original aboriginal inhabitants ofIndia.  They had been subjugated byan Aryan people who had come from
elsewhere and settled in India.Ghurye did not disagree with thebasic argument put forward by Risley butbelieved it to be only partially correct.He pointed out the problem with usingaverages alone without considering the
variation in the distribution of aparticular measurement for a givencommunity. Ghurye believed that

Risley™s thesis of 
the upper castes beingAryan and the lower castes beingnon-Aryan was broadly true only fornorthern India.  In other parts of India,
the inter-group differences in theanthropometric measurements werenot very large or systematic. This
suggested that, in most of India exceptthe Indo-Gangetic plain, differentracial groups had been mixing with
each other for a very long time.  Thus,
‚racial purity™ had been preserved dueto the prohibition on inter-marriageonly in ‚Hindustan proper™ (north
India). In the rest of the country, thepractice of endogamy (marrying onlywithin a particular caste group) may
89INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTShave been introduced into groups thatwere already racially varied.Today, the racial theory of caste isno longer believed, but in the first halfof the 20th century it was stillconsidered to be true.  There areconflicting opinions among historiansabout the Aryans and their arrival inthe subcontinent.  However, at thetime that Ghurye was writing these
were among the concerns of thediscipline, which is why his writingsattracted attention.Ghurye is also known for offeringa comprehensive definition of caste.
His definition emphasises six features.(i)Caste is an institution based on
segmental division.  This meansthat caste society is divided into a
number of closed, mutually exclusive
segments or compartments. 
Eachcaste is one such compartment.
It is closed because caste isdecided by birth Š the childrenborn to parents of a particular
caste will always belong to thatcaste. On the other hand, there isno way other than birth ofacquiring caste membership.  Inshort, a person™s caste is decided
by birth at birth; it can neither beavoided nor changed.(ii)Caste society is based on
hierarchical division. Each caste isstrictly unequal to every othercaste, that is, every caste is eitherhigher or lower than every otherone. In theory (though not inpractice), no two castes are everequal.(iii)The institution of caste necessarilyinvolves restrictions on socialinteraction, specially the sharingof food.  There are elaborate rulesprescribing what kind of food maybe shared between which groups.These rules are governed by ideas
of purity and pollution. The samealso applies to social interaction,most dramatically in theinstitution of untouchability,where even the touch of people of
particular castes is thought to bepolluting.(iv)Following from the principles of
hierarchy and restricted socialinteraction, caste also involves
differential rights and duties fordifferent castes.  These rights and
duties pertain not only to religiouspractices but extend to the secularworld.  As ethnographic accounts
of everyday life in caste societyhave shown, interactions betweenpeople of different castes aregoverned by these rules.(v)Caste 
restricts the choice ofoccupation, which, like caste itself,is decided by birth and ishereditary.  At the level of society,caste functions as a rigid form ofthe division of labour with specific
occupations being allocated tospecific castes.(vi)Caste involves strict restrictionson marriage.  Caste ‚endogamy™,or marriage only within the caste,is often accompanied by rulesabout ‚exogamy™, or whom onemay not marry.  This combination
 90UNDERSTANDING 
SOCIETYDhurjati Prasad Mukerji  (1894-1961)D.P. Mukerji was born on 5 October 1894 in a middleclass Bengali brahmin family with a long tradition ofinvolvement in higher education.  Undergraduate degreein science and postgraduate degrees in History andEconomics from Calcutta University.1924:Appointed Lecturer in the Department ofEconomics and Sociology at Lucknow University1938:41 Served 
as Director of Information under thefirst Congress-led government of the United
Provinces of British India (present day UttarPradesh).1947:Served as a Member of the U.P. Labour Enquiry Committee.
1949:Appointed Professor (by special order of the Vice Chancellor) at Lucknow
University.1953:Appointed Professor of Economics at Aligarh Muslim University
1955:Presidential Address to the newly formed Indian Sociological Society
1956:Underwent major 
surgery for throat cancer in Switzerland Died on 5December 1961.of rules about eligible and non-eligible groups helps reproduce
the caste system.Ghurye™s definition helped to
make the study of caste more
systematic. His conceptual definitionwas based on what the classical texts
prescribed. In 
actual practice, manyof these features of caste were
changing, though all of them continue
to exist in some form. Ethnographic
fieldwork over the 
next 
severaldecades helped to
 provide valuable
accounts of what was happening tocaste in independent India.Between the 1920s and the 1950s,sociology in India was equated with
the two major departments at Bombayand Lucknow. Both began ascombined departments of sociologyand economics. While the Bombay
department in this period was led by
G.S. Ghurye, the Lucknow department
had three major figures, the famous‚trinity™ of Radhakamal Mukerjee (thefounder), D.P. Mukerji, and D.N.
Majumdar. Although all three were
well known and widely respected, D.P.
Mukerji was perhaps the mostpopular. In fact, D.P. Mukerji Š or D.P.as he was generally known Š was
among the most influential scholars
of his generation not only in sociology
but in intellectual and public lifebeyond the academy.  His influenceand popularity came not so much from
91INDIAN SOCIOLOGISTShis scholarly writings as from histeaching, his speaking at academicevents, and his work in the media,including newspaper articles andradio programmes. D.P. came tosociology via history and economics,and retained an active interest in awide variety of subjects ranging acrossliterature, music, film, western andIndian philosophy, Marxism, politicaleconomy, and development planning.He was strongly influenced byMarxism, though he had more faithin it as a method of social analysisthan as a political programme foraction. D.P. wrote many books inEnglish and Bengali.  His Introductionto Indian Music is a pioneering work,considered a classic in its genre.D.P. Mukerji on Tradition and ChangeIt was through his dissatisfactionwith Indian history and economicsthat D.P. turned to sociology.  He felt
very strongly that the crucialdistinctive feature of India was itssocial system, and that, therefore, itwas important for each social scienceto be rooted in this context. The
decisive aspect of the Indian contextwas the social aspect: history, politics
and economics in India were lessdeveloped in comparison with thewest; however, the social dimensionswere ‚over-developed™.  As D.P. wrote ,
ﬁ– my conviction grew that India hadhad society, and very little else.  Infact, she had too much of it.  Herhistory, her economics, and even her

philosophy, I realised, had alwayscentred in social groups, and at best,in socialised persons.ﬂ (Mukherji1955:2)Given the centrality of society inIndia, it became the first duty of anIndian sociologist to study and toknow the social traditions of India.  For
D.P. this study of tradition was notoriented only towards the past, butalso included sensitivity to change.
Thus, tradition was a living tradition,maintaining its links with the past, butalso adapting to the present and thus
evolving over time. As he wrote, ﬁ...it
is not enough for the Indian sociologistto be a sociologist. He must be anIndian first, that is, he is to share in
the folk-ways, mores, customs andtraditions, for the purpose ofunderstanding his social system and
what lies beneath it and beyond it.ﬂIn keeping with this view, he believedthat sociologists should learn and be
familiar with both ‚high™ and ‚low™
languages and cultures Š not onlySanskrit, Persian or Arabic, but alsolocal dialects.D.P. argued that Indian cultureand society are not individualistic inthe western sense.  The average Indian
individual™s pattern of desires is moreor less rigidly fixed by his socio-cultural group pattern and he hardly
deviates from it. Thus, the Indian
social system is basically orientedtowards group, sect, or caste-action,not ‚voluntaristic™ individual action.
Although ‚voluntarism™ was beginningto influence the urban middle classes,its appearance ought to be itself an
interesting subject of study for theIndian sociologist. D.P. pointed out
