market that decides which subjectchoice may increase or decrease your
chances in the job market. The thirdand fourth advice complicate the mattereven more. It is not just our personaleffort or  just the job market that makesa differenceŠour 
gender and family orsocial background also matter.Individual efforts matter a great dealbut do not necessarily define outcomes.As we saw there are other social factorsthat play an important role in the final
outcome. Here we have only mentionedthe ‚job market™, the ‚socioeconomicbackground™ and ‚gender™. Can youthink of other factors?  We could wellask, ﬁWho decides what is a ‚good job™?ﬂDo all societies have similar notions ofwhat is a ﬁgood job?ﬂ Is money thecriteria? Or is it respect or socialrecognition or individual satisfactionthat decides the worth of a job? Do
culture and social norms have any roleto play?The individual student must studyhard to do well. But how well h/shedoes is structured by a whole set of
societal factors. The job market isdefined by the needs of the economy.CHAPTER 1SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIETYIINTRODUCTIONLet us begin with some suggestionsthat are often made to young studentslike you. One advice often made is,ﬁStudy hard and you will do well inlife.ﬂ The second advice as often madeis, ﬁ If you do this subject or set ofsubjects you will have a better chanceof getting a good job in the futureﬂ. Thethird could be, ﬁ As a boy this does notseem a correct choice of subjectﬂ or ﬁAsa girl, do you think your choice ofsubjects is a practical one?ﬂ  The fourth,ﬁYour family needs you to get a job soonso why choose a profession that willtake a very long timeﬂ or ﬁYou will joinyour family business so why do youwish to do this subject?ﬂLet us examine the suggestions. Doyou think the first advice contradictsthe other three? For the first advicesuggests that if you work very hard, youwill do very well and get a good job.The onus rests upon the individual. The

second advice suggests that apart fromyour individual effort, there is a job
