 82INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYIINTROUDUCTION
Have you ever wondered why a subject
like sociology is called a social science?
More than any other discipline,sociology deals with things that arealready familiar to most people.  All ofus live in society, and we already knowa lot about the subject matter ofsociologyŠ social groups, institutions,
norms, relationships and so onŠ
through our own experience.  It seemsfair, then, to ask what makes thesociologist different from other
members of society.  Why should s/hebe called a social scientist?As with all scientific disciplines, thecrucial element here is method, or theprocedures through which knowledgeis gathered.  For in the final analysis,sociologists can claim to be differentfrom lay persons not because of howmuch they know or what they know,but because of how they acquire their
knowledge.  This is one reason for thespecial importance of method insociology.
As you have seen in the previous
chapters, sociology is deeply interestedin the lived experience of people. For
example, when studying socialphenomena like friendship or religionor bargaining in markets, the
sociologist wants to know not only
what is observable by the bystander,
but also the opinions and feelings ofthe people involved. Sociologists try toadopt the point of view of people theystudy, to see the world through their
eyes.  What does friendship mean to
people in different cultures?  Whatdoes a religious person think he/she
is doing when performing a particular
ritual? How do shopkeeper and
customer interpret each other™s words
and gestures while bargaining for abetter price?  The answers to suchquestions are clearly part of the lived
experience of actors involved, and they
are of great interest to sociology.  This
need to understand both the outsider™sand the insider™s points of view isanother reason why method is
particularly important in s
ociology.CHAPTER 5DOING SOCIOLOGY : RESEARCH METHODS
 83DOING SOCIOLOGY: RESEARCH METHODSIISOME METHODOLOGICAL ISSUESAlthough it is often used simply as asubstitute for (or synonym of) ‚method™,the word ‚methodology™ actually refersto the study of method.  Methodological
issues or questions are thus about thegeneral problems of scientificknowledge-gathering that go beyondany one particular method, techniqueor procedure.  We begin by looking at
the ways in which sociologists try toproduce knowledge that can claim tobe scientific.Objectivity and Subjectivityin SociologyIn everyday language, the word‚objective™ means unbiased, neutral, orbased on facts alone.  In order to beobjective about something, we mustignore our own feelings or attitudes
about that thing.  On the other hand,the word ‚subjective™ means somethingthat is based on individual values andpreferences.  As you will have learntalready, every science is expected to be
‚objective™, to produce unbiasedknowledge based solely on facts.  Butthis is much harder to do in the socialsciences than in the natural sciences.For example, when a geologiststudies rocks, or a botanist studiesplants, they must be careful not to lettheir personal biases or preferencesaffect their work.  They must report thefacts as they are; they must not (for
example) let their liking for a particularscientific theory or theorist influence theresults of their research.  However, the
geologist and the botanist are notthemselves part of the world they study,i.e. the natural world of rocks or of
plants.  By contrast, social scientists
study the world in which they
themselves liveŠthe 
social world ofhuman relations.  This creates specialproblems for objectivity in a social
science like sociology.First of all, there is the obviousproblem of bias.  Because sociologistsare also members of society, they willalso have all the normal likes and
dislikes that people have.  A sociologist
studying family relations will herself
be a member of a family, and herexperiences are likely to influence her.Even when the sociologist has no direct
personal experience of the group s/he
is studying, there is still the possibility
of being affected by the values andprejudices of one™s own social context.For example, when studying a caste
or religious community other than her
own, the sociologist may be influenced
by the attitudes about thatcommunity prevalent in her own pastor present social environment. How do
sociologists guard against these
dangers?One method is to rigorously andcontinuously examine one™s own ideasand feelings about the subject of
research. More generally, the sociologisttries to take an outsider™s perspectiveon her/his own workŠshe/he tries to
look at herself/himself and her/hisresearch through the eyes of others.
This technique is called ‚self-reflexivity™,or sometimes just ‚reflexivity™. The
sociologist constantly subjects her own

 84INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYattitudes and opinions to self-examination. S/he tries to consciously
adopt the point of view of others,specially those who are the subjects ofher research.One of the practical aspects ofreflexivity is the importance of carefully
documenting whatever one is doing.Part of the claims to superiority
of research methods lies in thedocumentation of all procedures andthe formal citing of all sources of
evidence. This ensures that others can
retrace the steps we have taken to arriveat a particular conclusion, and see forthemselves if we are right.  It also helps
us to check and re-check our ownthinking or line of argument.But however, self-reflexive thesociologist tries to be, there is always
the possibility of unconscious bias.  Todeal with this possibility, sociologists
explicitly mention those features of their
own social background that might berelevant as a possible source of bias onthe topic being researched. This alerts
readers to the possibility of bias andallows them to mentally ‚compensate™for it when reading the research study.(You could go back to Chapter 1, andre-read the section (pp. 7-8) which talks
about the difference between commonsense and sociology).Another problem with objectivity insociology is the fact that, generally,there are many versions of the ‚truth™in the social world.  Things look differentfrom different vantage points, and so
the social world typically involves manycompeting versions or interpretationsof reality.  For example, a shopkeeper
and a customer may have very different
ideas about what is a ‚good™ price,  ayoung person and an aged person mayhave very different notions of ‚good
food™, and so on.  There is no simpleway of judging which particularinterpretation is true or more correct,
and often it is unhelpful to think inthese terms.  In fact, sociology tries notto judge in this way because it is really
interested in what people think, and
why they think what they think.A further complication arises fromthe presence of multiple points of view
in the social sciences themselves.  Likeits sister social sciences, sociology toois a ‚multi-paradigmatic™ science.  ThisActivity 1Can you observe yourself as you observe others? Write a short description ofyourself as seen from the perspective of: (i) your best friend; (ii) your rival; (iii)
your teacher.  You must imagine yourself to be these people and think aboutyourself from their point of view.  Remember to describe yourself in the thirdpersonŠas 
‚he™ or ‚she™ rather than ‚I™ or ‚me™. Afterwards, you can share similardescriptions written by your classmates. Discuss each others™ descriptionsŠ
how accurate or interesting do you find them? Are there any surprising thingsin these descriptions?
 85DOING SOCIOLOGY: RESEARCH METHODSmeans that competing and mutuallyincompatible schools of thought
coexist within the discipline (Recall thediscussion in Chapter 2 aboutconflicting theories of society).All this makes objectivity a verydifficult and complicated thing in
sociology.  In fact, the old notion ofobjectivity is widely considered to be an
outdated perspective.  Social scientistsno longer believe that the traditionalnotion of an ‚objective, disinterested™
social science is attainable; in fact such
an ideal can actually be misleading.This does not mean that there is nouseful knowledge to be obtained via
sociology, or that objectivity is a uselessconcept.  It means that objectivity hasto be thought of as the goal of a
continuous, ongoing process ratherthan an already achieved end result.Multiple Methods and Choice ofMethodsSince there are multiple truths andmultiple perspectives in sociology, it ishardly surprising that there are also
multiple methods.  There is no singleunique road to sociological truth.  Ofcourse, different methods are more or
less suited to tackle different types ofresearch questions. Moreover, everymethod has its own strengths and
weaknesses.  It is thus futile to argue
about the superiority or inferiority ofdifferent methods.   It is more importantto ask if the method chosen is the
appropriate one for answering thequestion that is being asked.For example, if one is interested infinding out whether most Indianfamilies are still ‚joint families™, then acensus or survey is the best method.However, if one wishes to compare the
status of women in joint and nuclear
families, then interviews, case studies
or participant observation may all beappropriate methods.There are different ways ofclassifying or categorising variousmethods commonly used by

sociologists. It is conventional, forexample, to distinguish betweenquantitative and qualitative methods:the former deals in countable or
measurable variables (proportions,
averages, and the like) while the latterdeals with more abstract and hard tomeasure phenomena like attitudes,
emotions and so on. A related
distinction is between methods that
study observable behaviour and thosethat study non-observable meanings,values and other interpretational things.Another way of classifying methodsis to distinguish the ones that rely on
‚secondary™ or already existing data (inthe form of documents or other recordsand artefacts) from those that are
designed to produce fresh or ‚primary™
data.  Thus historical methods typically
rely on secondary material found inarchives, while interviews generateprimary data, and so on.Yet another way of categorisation is
to separate ‚micro™ from ‚macro™methods.  The former are designed to
work in small intimate settings usuallywith a single researcher; thus theinterview and participant observation
are thought of as micro methods.Macro methods are those that are able
 86INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYto tackle large scale research involvinglarge numbers of respondents and
investigators. Survey research is the mostcommon example of a ‚macro™ method,although some historical methods can
also tackle macro phenomena.Whatever the mode of classification,it is important to remember that it is amatter of convention. The dividing line
between different kinds of methodsneed not be very sharp. It is oftenpossible to convert one kind of method
into another, or to supplement one with
another.The choice of method is usuallydictated by the nature of the research
question being addressed by thepreferences of the researcher, and bythe constraints of time and/or
resources.  The recent trend in socialscience is to advocate the use ofmultiple methods to bear on the same
research problem from different
vantage points.  This is sometimesreferred to as ‚triangulation™, that is, aprocess of reiterating or pinpointing
something from different directions.  Inthis way, different methods can beused to complement each other to
produce a much better result thanwhat might have been possible witheach method by itself.Because the methods mostdistinctive of sociology are those thatare designed to produce ‚primary™ data,these are the ones stressed here.  Even
within the category of ‚field work™ basedmethods, we shall introduce you toonly the most prominent, namely the
survey, interview and participantobservation.Participant ObservationPopular in sociology and speciallysocial anthropology, participantobservation refers to a particularmethod by which sociologist learnsabout society, culture and people thath/she is studying (Recall the discussionon sociology and social anthropologyfrom Chapter 1).This method is different fromothers in many ways. Unlike othermethods of primary data collection likesurveys or interviews, field workinvolves a long period of interactionwith the subjects of research.Typically, the sociologist or socialanthropologist spends manymonthsŠusually about a year or
sometimes moreŠ
living among thepeople being studied as one of them.
As a non-native ‚outsider™, theanthropologist is supposed toimmerse himself
/herself in the cultureof the ‚natives™Šby learning
their language and  participatingintimately in 
their everyday lifeŠ
in an effort to acquire all the explicit
and implicit knowledge andskills of the ‚insider™.  Although thesociologist or anthropolog
ist usuallyhas specific areas of interest, the overall
goal of ‚participant observation™ fieldwork is to learn about the ‚whole wayof life™ of a community. Indeed themodel is that of the child: 
sociologistsand anthropologists are supposed tolearn everything about their adoptivecommunities in just the holistic way thatsmall children learn about the world.Participant observation is oftencalled ‚field work™.  The term originated
 87DOING SOCIOLOGY: RESEARCH METHODSin the natural sciences, speciallythose like botany, zoology, geology
etc.  In these disciplines, scientistscould not only work in the laboratory,they had to go out into ‚the field™ tolearn about their subjects (like rocks,insects or plants).IIIFIELD WORK IN SOCIALANTHROPOLOGYField work as a rigorous scientificmethod played a major role inestablishing anthropology as a socialscience.  The early anthropologists were
amateur enthusiasts interested inexotic primitive cultures. They were‚armchair scholars™ who collected andorganised information about distantcommunities (which they had never
themselves visited) available from thereports and descriptions written bytravellers, missionaries, colonialadministrators, soldiers and other ‚menon the spot™.  For example, James
Frazer™s famous book, The GoldenBough, which inspired many earlyanthropologists was based entirely onsuch second hand accounts, as was thework of Emile Durkheim on primitive
religion.  Towards the end of the 19thand in the first decade of the 20thcentury many early anthropologists,some of whom were natural scientistsby profession, began to carry out
systematic surveys and first handobservation of tribal languages,customs, rituals and beliefs.  Relianceon second hand accounts began to bethought of as unscholarly, and the goodresults obtained from first hand workhelped cement this growing prejudice
(See Box on next page).Since the 1920s, participantobservation or field work has beenconsidered an integral part of social
anthropological training and theprincipal method through whichknowledge is produced. Almost all of
the influential scholars in the disciplinehave done such field workŠin fact,
many communities or geographical
places have become famous in the
discipline because of their associationwith classic instances of field work.What did the social anthropologistactually do when doing fieldwork?
Usually, s/he began by doing a censusof the community s/he was studying.
This involved making a detailed list ofall the people who lived in a community,including information such as their sex,
age group and family. This could be
accompanied by an attempt to map thephysical layout of the village orsettlement, including the location of
houses and other socially relevant sites.One of the important techniquesanthropologists use, specially in the
beginning stages of their field work isto construct a genealogy of thecommunity.  This may be 
based on theinformation obtained in the census, but
extends much further since it involvescreating a family tree for individual
members, and extending the family tree
as far back as possible. For example,the head of a particular household orfamily would be a
sked about hisrelativesŠbrothers, 
sisters, cousinsŠ
in his or her own generation;
 88INTRODUCING SOCIOLOGYBronislaw Malinowski and the ‚Invention™ of Field WorkAlthough he was not the first to use this methodŠdifferent versions of it had
been tried out all over the world by other scholarsŠBronislaw Malinowski, a

Polish anthropologist settled in Britain, is widely believed to have establishedfield work as the distinctive method of social anthropology.  In 1914, when theFirst World War broke out in Europe, Malinowski was visiting Australia, which
was a part of the British Empire at that time. Because Poland was annexed by
Germany in the war, it was declared an enemy country by Britain, andMalinowski technically became an ‚enemy alien™ because of his Polish nationality.He was, of course, a respected professor at the London School of Economics and
was on very good terms with the British and Australian authorities.  But since
he was technically an enemy alien, the law required that he be ﬁinternedﬂ or
confined to a specific place.Malinowski had anyway wanted to visit several places in Australia and theislands of the South Pacific for his anthropological research, so he requestedthe authorities to allow him to serve his internment in the Trobriand Islands, a
British-Australian  possession in the South Pacific. This was agreed toŠthe

Australian government even financed his tripand Malinowski spent a year
and a half living in the Trobriand Islands. He lived in a tent in the native villages,learnt the local language, and interacted closely with the ‚natives™ in an effort to
learn about their culture. He maintained careful and detailed records of his
observations and also kept a daily diary. He later wrote books on Trobriand
culture based on these field notes and diaries; these books quickly became
famous and are considered classics even today.Even before his Trobriand experience, Malinowski had been converted tothe belief that the future of anthropology lay in direct and unmediated interactionbetween the anthropologist and the native culture. He was convinced that  the
discipline would not progress beyond the status of an intellectual hobby unlessits practitioners engaged themselves in systematic first-hand observationpreceded by intensive language learning. This observation had to be done in
contextŠthat 
is, the anthropologist had to live among the native people andobserve life as it happened rather than interviewing individual natives
summoned to the town or outpost for this purpose.  The use of interpreters was
also to be avoidedŠit was only when the anthropologist could interact directly

with the natives that a true and authentic account of their culture could be
produced.His influential position at the London School of Economics and the reputationof his work in the Trobriand enabled Malinowski to campaign for theinstitutionalisation of field work as a mandatory part of the training imparted tostudents of anthropology. It also helped the discipline to gain acceptance as a
rigorous science worthy of scholarly respect.
