The Rocking-horse Winner19The Rocking-horse WinnerD.H. LawrenceLook for these expressions in the story and guess the meaningfrom the contextturned to dustcareeredsequinoverwroughtreiteratedbrazening it outThere was a woman who was beautiful, who started withall the advantages, yet she had no luck. She married forlove and love turned to dust. She had bonny children, yet,she felt they had been thrust upon her and she could notlove them. They looked at her coldly as if they were findingfault with her. And hurriedly she felt she must cover up
some fault in herself. Yet what it was that she must cover
up she never knew. Nevertheless, when her children werepresent, she always felt the centre of her heart go hard.This troubled her and, in her manner, she was all the
more gentle and anxious for her children as if she loved
them very much. Only she herself knew that at the centreof her heart was a hard little place that could not feel love,no, not for anybody. Everybody else said of her: ‚She is
such a good mother. She adores her children.™ Only she
herself, and her children themselves, knew it was not so.They read it in each other™s eyes.There were a boy and two little girls. They lived in apleasant house, with a garden, and they had discreet servants,
and felt themselves superior to anyone in the neighbourhood.Although they lived in style, they felt always an anxietyin the house. There was never enough money.The mother had a small income and the father had asmall income but not nearly enough for the social position3
20Woven Words
which they had to keep up. The father went into town tosome office. But though he had good prospects, these
prospects never materialised. There was always the grindingsense of the shortage of money though the style was alwayskept up.At last the mother said: ‚I will see if I can™t makesomething.™ But she did not know where to begin. She rackedher brains, and tried this thing and the other but couldnot find anything successful. The failure made deep linescome into her face. Her children were growing up; theywould have to go to school. There must be more money,
there must be more money. The father, who was always
very handsome and expensive in his tastes, seemed as ifhe never would be able to do anything worth doing. Andthe mother, who had a great belief in herself, did not succeed
any better, and her tastes were just as expensive.
And so the house came to be haunted by the unspokenphrase: ‚There must be more money! There must be more
money!™ The children could hear it all the time, thoughnobody said it aloud. They heard it at Christmas, whenexpensive and splendid toys filled the nursery. Behindthe shining modern rocking-horse, behind the smart doll™s
house, a voice would start whispering: ‚There must bemore money! There must be more money!™ And the childrenwould stop playing, to listen for a moment. They would
look into each other™s eyes to see if they had all heard.And each one saw in the eyes of the other two that theytoo had heard. ‚There must be more money! There mustbe more money!™It came whispering from the springs of the still-swayingrocking-horse and even the horse, bending his wooden,champing head, heard it. The big doll, sitting so pink andsmirking in her new pram, could hear it quite plainly andseemed to be smirking all the more self-consciously because
of it. The foolish puppy, too, that took the place of theteddy-bear, he was looking so extraordinarily foolish for no
other reason but that he heard the secret whisper all over
the house: ‚There must be more money!™Yet nobody ever said it aloud. The whisper was
everywhere and therefore no one spoke it. Just as no one
The Rocking-horse Winner21ever says ‚we are breathing™ in spite of the fact that breathis coming and going all the time.‚Mother,™ said the boy Paul one day, ‚why don™t we keep
a car of our own? Why do we always use uncle™s, or else ataxi?™‚Because we™re the poor members of the family,™ saidthe mother.
‚But why are we, mother?™
‚WellŠI suppose,™ she said slowly and bitterly, ‚it™s
because your father has no luck.™The boy was silent for some time.
‚Is luck money, mother?™ he asked, rather timidly.‚No, Paul, not quite. It™s what causes you to have money.™‚Oh!™, said Paul vaguely. ‚I thought when Uncle Oscarsaid filthy lucre, it meant money.™‚Filthy lucre does mean money,™ said the mother. ‚But
it™s lucre, not luck.™‚Oh,™ said the boy. ‚Then what is luck, mother?™‚It™s what causes you to have money. If you™re luckyyou have money. That™s why it™s better to be born lucky
than rich. If you™re rich, you may lose your money. But ifyou™re lucky, you will always get more money.™‚Oh! Will you? And is father not lucky?™‚Very unlucky, I should say,™ she said bitterly.
The boy watched her with unsure eyes.
‚Why?™ he asked.‚I don™t know. Nobody ever knows why one person islucky and another unlucky.™‚Do they? Nobody at all? Does nobody know?™‚Perhaps God. But He never tells.™‚He ought to, then. And aren™t you lucky either, mother?™

‚I can™t be, if I married an unlucky husband.™‚But by yourself, aren™t you?™‚I used to think I was, before I married. Now I think Iam very unlucky indeed.™‚Why?™
‚WellŠnever mind! Perhaps I™m not really,™ she said.
The child looked at her to see if she meant it. But he saw,by the lines of her mouth, that she was only trying to hidesomething from him.
22Woven Words
‚Well, anyhow,™ he said stoutly, ‚I™m a lucky person.™
‚Why?™ said his mother, with a sudden laugh.

He stared at her. He didn™t even know why he had said
it.‚God told me,™ he asserted, brazening it out.‚1 hope He did, dear,™ she said, again with a laugh, but
rather bitter.
‚He did, mother!™
‚Excellent!™ said the mother, using one of her husband™s
exclamations.The boy saw she did not believe him; or rather, that
she paid no attention to his assertion. This angered himsomewhat and made him want to compel her attention.He went off by himself, vaguely, in a childish way,seeking for the clue to ‚luck™. Absorbed, taking no heed of
other people, he went about with a sort of stealth, seekinginwardly for luck. He wanted luck. He wanted it, he wanted
it. When the two girls were playing dolls in the nursery, hewould sit on his big rocking-horse, charging madly intospace, with a frenzy that made the little girls peer at himuneasily. Wildly the horse careered. The waving dark hairof the boy tossed, his eyes had a strange glare in them. The
little girls dared not speak to him.When he had ridden to the end of his mad little journey,he climbed down and stood in front of his rocking-horse,
staring fixedly into its lowered face. Its red mouth wasslightly open, its big eye was wide and glassy-bright.‚Now!™ he would silently command the snorting steed.‚Now, take me to where there is luck. Now take me!™And he would slash the horse on the neck with thelittle whip he had asked Uncle Oscar for. He knew the horse
could take him to where there was luck if only he forced it.So he would mount again and start on his furious ride,hoping at last to get there. He knew he could get there.‚You™ll break your horse, Paul!™ said the nurse.
‚He™s always riding like that, I wish he™d leave off™,
said his sister, Joan.
But he only glared down on them in silence. Nursegave him up. She could make nothing of him. Anyhow, hewas growing beyond her.

The Rocking-horse Winner23One day his mother and his Uncle Oscar came in whenhe was on one of his furious rides. He did not speak tothem.‚Hello, you young jockey! Riding a winner?™ said hisuncle.‚Aren™t you growing too big for a rocking-horse? You™re
not a very little boy any longer, you know,™ said his mother.
But Paul only gave a blue glare from his big, ratherclose-set eyes. He would speak to nobody when he was infull tilt. His mother watched him with an anxiousexpression on her face.At last he suddenly stopped forcing his horse into themechanical gallop and slid down.‚Well, I got there,™ he announced fiercely, his blue eyes
still flaring and his sturdy long legs straddling apart.‚Where did you get to?™ asked his mother.
‚Where I wanted to go,™ he flared back at her.

‚That™s right, son!™ said Uncle Oscar, ‚Don™t you stop
till you get there. What™s the horse™s name?™‚He doesn™t have a name,™ said the boy.‚Gets on without all right?™ asked the uncle.‚Well, he has different names. He was called Sansovino
last week.™‚Sansovino, eh? Won the Ascot. How did you know his
name?™‚He always talks about horse-races with Bassett,™ saidJoan.The uncle was delighted to find that his small nephewwas posted with all the racing news. Bassett, the younggardener, who had been wounded in the left foot in the war
and had got his present job through Oscar Cresswell whose
batman he had been, was a perfect blade of the ‚turf™. Helived in the racing events, and the small boy lived withhim.Oscar Cresswell got it all from Bassett.‚Master Paul comes and asks me so I can™t do morethan tell him, sir,™ said Bassett, his face terribly serious,
as if he were speaking of religious matters.‚And does he ever put anything on a horse he fancies?™‚WellŠI don™t want to give him awayŠhe™s a young sport, a

24Woven Words
fine sport, sir. Would you mind asking himself? He sort of
takes a pleasure in it and perhaps he™d feel I was giving
him away, sir, if you don™t mind.™
Bassett was serious as a church.The uncle went back to his nephew and took him offfor a ride in the car.
‚Say, Paul, old man, do you ever put anything on ahorse?™ the uncle asked.The boy watched the handsome man closely.‚Why, do you think I oughtn™t to?™ he parried.‚Not a bit of it! I thought perhaps you might give me atip for the Lincoln.™The car sped on into the country, going down to UncleOscar™s place in Hampshire.‚Honour bright?™ said the nephew.‚Honour bright, son!™ said the uncle.‚Well, then, Daffodil.™

‚Daffodil! I doubt it, sonny. What about Mirza?™‚I only know the winner,™ said the boy. ‚That™s Daffodil.™
‚Daffodil, eh?™There was a pause. Daffodil was an obscure horsecomparatively.‚Uncle!™
‚Yes, son?™
‚You won™t let it go any further, will you? I promised
Bassett.™‚Bassett be damned, old man! What™s he got to do with it?™
‚We™re partners. We™ve been partners from the first.
Uncle, he lent me my first five shillings which I lost. Ipromised him. Honour bright, it was only between me andhim; only you gave me that ten-shilling note I started
winning with so I thought you were lucky. You won™t let it
go any further, will you?™
The boy gazed at his uncle from those big, hot, blueeyes, set rather close together. The uncle stirred and laughed

uneasily.‚Right you are, son! I™ll keep your tip private. Daffodil,eh? How much are you putting on him?™‚All except twenty pounds,™ said the boy. ‚I keep that inreserve.™
The Rocking-horse Winner25The uncle thought it a good joke.‚You keep twenty pounds in reserve, do you, you young
romancer? What are you betting, then?™I™m betting three hundred,™ said the boy gravely. ‚Butit™s between you and me Uncle Oscar! Honour bright?™The uncle burst into a roar of laughter.
‚It™s between you and me all right, you young NatGould,™ he said, laughing. ‚But where™s your three hundred?™‚Bassett keeps it for me. We™re partners.™

‚You are, are you? And what is Bassett putting on
Daffodil?™‚He won™t go quite as high as I do, I expect. Perhapshe™ll go a hundred and fifty.™‚What pennies?™ laughed the uncle.‚Pounds,™ said the child, with a surprised look at hisuncle.‚Bassett keeps a bigger reserve than I do.™ Betweenwonder and amusement, Uncle Oscar was silent. Hepursued that matter no further but he determined to takehis nephew with him to the Lincoln races.‚Now, son,™ he said, ‚I™m putting twenty on Mirza andI™ll put five on for you on any horse you fancy. What™s your
pick?™‚Daffodil, uncle.™
‚No, not the fiver on Daffodil.™
‚I should if it was my own fiver,™ said the child.
‚Good! Good! Right you are! A fiver for me and a fiverfor you on Daffodil.™The child had never been to a race-meeting before,and his eyes were blue fire. He pursed his mouth tight andwatched. A Frenchman, just in front, had put his money
on Lancelot. Wild with excitement, he flayed his arms upand down, yelling ‚Lancelot! Lancelot!™ in his French accent.Daffodil came in first, Lancelot second, Mirza third. The
child, flushed and with eyes blazing, was curiously serene.His uncle brought him four five-pound notes, four to one.‚What am I to do with these?™ he cried, waving thembefore the boy™s eyes.ﬁI suppose we™ll talk to Bassett,™ said the boy. ‚I expect Ihave fifteen hundred now and twenty in reserve; and this twenty.™
