Glory at Twilight85Glory at Twilight Bhabani BhattacharyaLook for these expressions in the story and guess the meaningfrom the contextbrusquelyattuned himselfqueer rhythmic frenzywrenchingflush of prosperitydaze of bewilderment
wide-eyed wonder and eager homage
talking animatedlytremulous deliberation

on terms of a perpetual feudThe slow, narrow-gauge Indian train with its awkward freakof an engine had a way of making unauthorised stops forno good reason, between fields of corn or at the foot of avillageŠit was said that the guard signalled a halt to plucka pumpkin or ripe melons from its stem or to buy fistfuls of
green gram from a peasant. Some of the passengersgrumbled and sat with drawn brows, composing in theirminds angry letters to Authority, or to the Press, but othersseized the chance to slip merrily out of doors for a breathof air and a view of the green fields.Satyajit, languid on the cushioned bench now vacatedby the other occupants, reached out for his cigarettes but,
on second thought, withdrew his hand brusquely. That won™tdo, he told himself with a stern shake of his head. Hissmoke was rationed. He had attuned himself in the pastmonth to a fast-growing list of denials, large and small,and this was one. How can he afford the unrestricted luxury
of chain smoking? Life lay sharpening to realities that stillhad the semblance of an undreamable dream.He winced, the turning wheel of fortune in his unhappyeye, as always. Along the orbit of reminiscence he went7
86Woven Words
round and round, pulled by a force beyond his will. Thebanking establishment of which he had attained control.
The amazing tempo of it all. Luck had come his way,undeniably, but behind it was his mind, his initiative, grit,energy. Starting as a mere clerk he had become Managing
Director. And now? What now?
Tall, thin, near forty, he had sharp features, the hairreceding on his temple in wide shiny smooth patches. His
eyes hated glare and he wore smart eye-glasses to shieldthem. His mouth, thin-lipped, would tighten in repose to aline that suggested strength of will but might have been
only pride.‚What now?™ he said to himself in an underbreath. Thosewords had become his obsession. ‚What now?™He had no business to be on this wretched train on aneglected railroad, travelling away from the city where hemust look for work, for the means of living. With the sudden
collapse of his bank, all his private assets were goneovernight; the equities; the house on Tagore Street; eventhe two cars, his and his wife™s. A mercy that she wasaway from the scene, with her parents at Delhi, andunaware of the full extent of the ruin. A telegram had come
last Tuesday announcing the safe birth of her child. Theirfirst-born, for he had married late in life. His son, his heir.
And he had sold off his diamond ring to send his young
wife a remittance for the name-giving rites.She had married a man of fortuneŠthat made it harderfor him in this crisis. True, she knew all about his earlier
life. But that was story-book stuff. It could be narratedhappily to their first-born when he grew older. The story
lay killed by its sequelŠfailure. Glory was all overlaid with
dark shame. Glory was dead.It would be easy enough today if there were none elseto think of except himself. Born in a humble village home,
self-educated, struggle had been his life-breath. Howgrateful he was for the clerkship he secured. A turning ofthe wheel of fortune? he had wondered. The next turning,
a year after, was more dramatic. What made him give a
fixed look to the man beyond the brass grille of the counter?The cheque presented for encashment was not a large sum.
Glory at Twilight87Eye upon eye. Alarm vivid in the face and the hand on thecounter shaking curiously. Surprised, stirred by a quick
impulse, he took the cheque to the accounts desk, comparedthe signature with the one on record. It tallied. But thatface, that hand. A hundred reasons, none connected with
the cheque, could explain the face and hand. Even so, theimpulse led him to the telephone. ‚Sir, have you signed a
bearer cheque for Rs 2,000? It has yesterday™s date...™ ‚Rs2,000? No.™ His heart felt pain for lack of air. ‚Sir, are you
sure? The signature seems okay.™ In the next instance hewas back to his counter in a rush. Where was the man?
There, close to the exit, and the face turning back for amoment wore stark fear. He was going away.
Feet bounded up the counter. The bank clerk hunted
down his prey on the gravel path, twenty paces from the
front door. There was no struggle. The man crumpled down
in a heap. He squatted with head between his hands, looking
down, tears rolling down. ‚Why did you have to commitforgery?™ ‚She has TB.™ ‚She?™ ‚She is dying for want ofmedicine.™ ‚Who?™ ‚My wife. I saw no other means. I givelessons in Maths to the rich man™s son. That money...™ Thehead between the hands wagged from side to side in a
queer rhythmic frenzy.That was the way the clerk grew into an accountant.He deserved what he had gained. He was not made to be a
mere clerk. Lost in the thrill, he had honest contempt forhis stepping-stone, the forgerer. You could not commit such
a crime even to save your dying wife. But today, as he saton his lone bench on the train, he saw mind-pictures andfelt troubled. The crouched figure on the gravel pathwrapped in mute grieving. The prisoner at the bar, face

frozen, as though he had died within himself. Had heanything to say to the Court? the Judge had asked. ‚Punishme.™ ‚Is that all?™ ‚Punish me as a killer.™ ‚Killer?™ ‚I have put

my wife to shame. Shame kills as fast as TB.™Yes, that wretched one had turned the wheel for him
with his trembling hand. From that point the wheel attained
a volition of its own, moving continuously. He had everyreason to be grateful to the forgerer. Too late now to seek
him out, give him a chance to live?
88Woven Words
Too late. He himself sorely needed a chance to live.The banking business lay around him in a broken massand there was he, prostrate on his face in the wreckage,sucking its dust. All his fault. He had tried to overreachhimself. Each wrong step was now clear in time™s
perspective. The run on the bank had come all too suddenlythough. Failure had a tempo far faster than success.He had great need to fly from himselfŠthat was why hewas on this train. A letter had come in the nick of time offering
him an excuse, a temporary relief from the wrenching within.‚The wedding of my fifth daughter, Beena, is to take
place on the twentieth of this month. I have kept you posted
with the progress of negotiations. I seek your benediction asin the case of my second, third and fourth daughtersŠKamini, Damini and Suhashi. With Beena wedded, therewill be only Aruna left, and she is in her tenth year. Your
benediction alone can pull me through the present daughter
crisis. That is all I have to sayŠYour helpless Uncle Srinath.™
Daughter crisis, indeed! mused Satyajit with a dimsmile. Uncle Srinath, a neighbour at Shantipur village butno blood relation, seemed to have been producing hisnumerous daughters secure in the faith that others would
bear the brunt of the repeated crises of their marriageneeds. And Satyajit, in the flush of prosperity, had beenmore than open-handed. It was a matter of pride, self-
satisfaction.In his younger days, the village people had not thoughtmuch of him, had not seen in him any special gift orbrilliance. One of the common herd. That was all the morereason why he enjoyed success. He needed the wide-eyedwonder and eager homage of Uncle Srinath and the like
while they had use and longing for his money. It was plaingive-and-take.All that was over. Fallen from his castle in the clouds,
Satyajit must tread the earthly ways of humble folk. But
he could not deny the old man altogether. He must send
some help. He had pondered over the amount. He had to
ponder over each rupee before he spent it.Then, all at once, he had come to a decision. He wouldgo to Shantipur and attend the marriage. This would be a
Glory at Twilight89welcome reliefŠthe city was suffocating him. His mindwould be freshened, his strength renewed for the coming
struggle by a return to the physical scene which had beenhis starting point in life. Let that be his starting point oncemore, outwardly as much as in the spirit. He would also
take this chance to look at his ancestral house and fish-pond, both leased out, bits of property still intact amid thevast demolition. Those he must pass on to his wife as hislast gift. And he had sent word to Uncle Srinath about hisarrival on the marriage day.The engine came to life with a shrill of warning.The passenger hurried back. Another half-hour and it
was Shantipur. Satyajit leaned out of the door, his eyes
looking for Uncle Srinath on the station platform, wheremany people stood crowded together, alert and
apparently excited, one of them holding aloft the nationalflag on a bamboo pole. A political celebrity on the train?
Strange that Uncle Srinath, who had always fearedpolitics, was leading the group. Suddenly, there was arush of legs towards Satyajit as he stepped down. Thelegs stopped and a booming chorus followed. Swagatam!Welcome!™
A small girl with an awestruck face stepped up with ajasmine garland in her hand. Satyajit stood in a daze ofbewilderment as the girl rose on tiptoe to place the chain
of flowers around his neck. He bent mechanically to receivethe offer, not knowing what it meant. It was obviously a
mistake, a very curious one.‚Welcome!™ the voices rang again. Then, an expectant
hush. Uncle Srinath turned round to the group. On the
high cheekbones and grey stubble of his face was a clear
coating of strong elation.‚Friends and brothers! Bengal has seen greatness inalmost every field of action. I shall not belittle your
knowledge by citing names. It is only in trade and industrythat Bengal has lagged behind sadlyŠthe plums ofbusiness have gone to people from upcountry or from
overseas. That is why our hearts grow big with pride atthe sight of a son of Bengal, a son of our own Shantipurvillage, who has attained great success in that field, that
90Woven Words
forbidden field, and become the glory of the motherland,Swagatam! Welcome!™
‚Swagatam!™ the combined voices roared while thetricolour flag on its tall pole nodded approvingly.When Satyajit slipped down from the ox cart at thedoor of a mud-brick house, a knot of women waiting tenselywith brass water-bowls rushed up and stooped over his
feet, scrambling for the privilege to wash his feet with coolwater. Satyajit shrank back, embarrassed.
‚It™s my Beena™s privilege,™ cried Srinath, smiling. ‚Thisis her day. Let Beena alone wash and wipe the reverent
feet. All her life she will remember this honour befallingher on the auspicious day of her marriage.™Satyajit looked at the girl who stepped forward, shy,slender with large pensive eyes in a graceful face. ‚So this is
the bride,™ he smiled at her and touched her hair in the gestureof blessing. ‚I hope the groom is worthy of this girl,™ he said as
she knelt down to unlace hisshoes. She slipped off his socksand poured cool water to freshenhis feet, washing them with keencare. As her slim fingers went
between his toes, hewiggled them, for hefelt ticklish. Presently
he sat on a carpet inthe inner verandahwith a plateful ofsweets and a glass ofwhey while Kamini,Damini and Suhashi
sat near him on theirhaunches and wavedpalm leaf fans with
all their energy, asthough each passingminute had to be fully
used before theirhands were deprivedof the privilege. Sweat
Glory at Twilight91broke out on their faces and they shifted their fans from righthand to left and again to the right. Their mother, who stood

by, now spoke in a murmur, husky with emotion.
‚You have been more of a father to these girls than he,™
jerking her head at her invisible husband. ‚But for thebigness of your heart, they would still be maids under thisroom, shooting up in years and in height with no chance ofhaving husband and home.™ She lifted her sari fringes toher eyes, wiping off two grateful tears.The meal over, Uncle Srinath, who had been shuttling
between the inner verandah and the outer quarters, now
stopped, leaning over his guest.‚Beena has been given the old jewellery of her mother,™
he confided. ‚So, that part of the dowry problem has beenmet. Her three married sisters, whom you see before youand who owe all their bliss in life to your benediction, havegiven her the marriage gifts she must have: sari, jacket,
chemise. Also brass utensils for her new household.™‚Good! Good!™ Satyajit cried happily. He had Rs 200in his purse and had wondered how much of it had to gointo the marriage pool. May be Rs 100; or, rather, Rs
101, since a figure ending with zero was not propitious.
During the meal he had been slowly adding to that figure:ten, twenty, finally stopping at an additional fifty. Nowthat Beena had got all she needed, he could just as well
slice a goodly bit off the amount. Let it be Rs 101. Thefifty rupees saved would buy a perambulator for hisnewborn son.‚Your benediction is our blind-man™s staff,™ Srinath went
on. ‚Do I have to say more?™ He apparently decided that he
did not, for he changed the topic abruptly. ‚My house has
become a place of pilgrimage. You are the pride of the village,
its strength. In you the people see their own inmost dreamfulfilled. Will you now show yourself for a minute to the
devotees who sit waitingŠ™Satyajit followed his host. His devotees were seated ona floor mat, talking animatedly, and at the sight of him
there was an instant hush. Hands joined to his chest,Satyajit made salutation to all. He caught sight of theschoolmaster who had taught him as a boy and made a
92Woven Words
deep obeisance. Swelled with pride, the old man swept thefloor mat group with a superior glance before he spoke:‚Didn™t I say? Didn™t I say a hundred and one times inthose far off days that the light of genius blazed on the faceof my young pupil? That he stood apart from every other
young pigŠ™ He broke short and yielded to a violent fit ofcoughing to cover up the slip. Presently he resumed: ‚Thathe with the light of genius on his face was afar from theworld where the other youngsters dwelt? Why, I predictedthat he would be a High Court JudgeŠ™Satyajit burst into a laugh. ‚Alas, I am no High CourtJudge™. ‚Even more, much more!™ counted the old man. His
good memory reached back to the boy with whom he hadbeen on terms of a perpetual feud. Always bent on somekind of mischiefŠhe did have an inventive mind that way!Arithmetic was his bogey. How does he count all his pile ofmoney? He owns a million, if Srinath is to be believed. A
million? And the old man hastened to add a brushful ofcolour to the drab picture presented by memory. ‚Even inthose far-off days I could see two shadow forms about him,
clear as lifeŠSaraswati at his left, Lakshmi at his right.And I knew even then that the twin goddesses of knowledge
and wealth, though hating the sight of each other, had for
once united, stayed together, drawn by their common love.™
He lifted joined palms to his forehead, offering salutationŠ
perhaps to those goddesses.Satyajit was determined to enjoy himself. He felt atwinge of regret that he had not thought of coming toShantipur and basking in the people™s homage when it wastruly his due. Now he was an impostor. He impersonated
the man he had been a few weeks before. He made an
angry jerk of his hand about his face, waving off a sand-flyŠand the regret. Let him be happy for the day even witha false echo, let him be wrapped a while in the lingering
twilight splendour of departed glory. Tommorow he wouldbe in the full fury of a stream, tugged under water, fighting
for life. Today he would have his last breath of peace,
freedom, content.Through the rest of the day he went round the village,meeting the elders, sipping the proffered milk of green
Glory at Twilight93coconuts. He visited his house occupied by a tenant. HishouseŠand he touched the walls possessively. This small
house gave him a feeling of security which had not come tohim even from his huge city mansion. He spent an hour bythe fish pond. His pondŠand he sprinkled a palmful of its
water on his head. A good-sized carp landed at the end ofhis hook. When he came home with the catch, Uncle Srinathgazed at it raptlyŠone would have thought he had neverbefore seen such fish. ‚What gills!™ he breathed in apparentecstasy. He patted the head of the fish with an affectionatehand. ‚Bride and groom shall eat curried portions of this
auspicious one when they break their marriage fast atmidnight. That will bring them all the blessings that lifecan give™. It was near twilight when the groom™s party arrivedin ox carts and palanquins. Conches blew welcome. Young
women gathered at the dooryard and gave the shrilltraditional greeting expressive of great joy; Ulu-ulu-ulu-
ulu-ulu! When the bridal party was well settled, chewingbetel leaf and waiting for the marriage hour as prescribedby the almanac, Satyajit felt for his purse. Time now to
part with Rs 101. Srinath, reading his thoughts, took himto the secluded darkness under a fig-tree in the backyard
‚My begging bowl is ready,™ he announced happily.‚Yes, yes,™ Satyajit nodded.

‚The cash dowry stands fixed. Only Rs 2001.™
‚What!™ Satyajit felt a hard blow in the pit of hisstomach.‚That is all.™‚Rs 2001?™Srinath smiled. ‚Everything else is provided for, even
the cost of the marriage feast. Only this last item awaitsyour benediction.™BenedictionŠSrinath™s favourite word. Nothingabstract in its meaning. It could be interpreted only in
terms of money. Satyajit felt a burning inside him. He hadstretched his leg right into the snare of benediction,unthinkingly. How could he be so very stupid?Srinath broke the silence with a half laugh. ‚This dropin the ocean of your fortune. It shames me to mention the
petty figure.™
94Woven Words
‚Why didn™t you write and tell me?™ The voice was harsh.The half laugh repeated itself. ‚Have I no sense? Iam not such a big ass as I look. What! Mention moneyto a millionaire! And such a pittance. A drop in theocean.™‚A drop,™ echoed Satyajit, his mouth dry. This was themoment for confession. He was even worse off than Srinath.Hard struggle lay ahead of him for bare survival. Srinathwould understand.‚Millionaire!™ Rhapsody in the voice. Plain worship onthe face. A devotee, prayerful before his god. ‚ We bask in

your benediction. Our life-spark itself is held in your fist;you can destroy it just by closing your fingers tight. Words
cannot say what I feel Š™Yes, the god had been a millionaire, truly. That was
yesterday. Today... Confession stuck in his throat, clutchedby the millionaire™s dead hand. Better give an excuse. He
had come rushing in the midst of heavy work and had notthought of equipping himself with adequate cash. Thatwould sound plausible. LaterŠit wouldn™t matter if Srinathdiscovered the terrible truth later, as he must.
Something stronger than he spoke with his tongue. ‚Ihad to catch the morning trainŠthere was no time to go to
the bank. Maybe someone in the villageŠ™ The words ‚casha cheque™ were almost on his lips. ‚Someone in the village
will advance a loanŠ™Uncle Srinath rushed out of the house, panic on hisface. He had been under the impression that a millionairealways had his pockets stuffed with money. Satyajit returnedto the assembled guests. Instantly the groom, on his foot-high satin-draped platform, fat round cushions on three
sides of him, was forgotten. Silence. All eyes took their fillof the rich man. A god on the pedestal of fortune. He toosat quiet, the tiredness within him heavier than even before.
The peace he had attained erstwhile was gone. He longedto see the face of his new-born son. The rich man™s sonwho would never ride in a perambulator.
Srinath returned in half an hour. His face looked angry.
Satyajit saw his beckoning hand, rose heavily to his feet,
and stepped outside, away from the people.
Glory at Twilight95‚Only one person in Shantipur can produce so muchcash at this late hour,™ said Srinath, ‚Harish, the money-
lender. That shark refuses to make an advance though.™
The swift flood of relief! ‚Harish does not trust me?™Moneylenders did have a sixth sense. There was no knowingwhen Harish would have got his money backŠperhaps never.
‚Preposterous! Not to trust the word and signature of amillionaire! Harish is off his senses; or, is it malice?™ The

voice collected anger. ‚I could drag him to you and make
him grovel at your feet and rub his fat nose on the ground.™Satyajit could be generous. ‚No need, no need. Trust is
out of date in these cynical times.™ The wonder of itŠhis
leg was off the snare of benediction!‚Where will our India be if such things are tolerated?What is Nehru doing about it? Is there no one to tell him
how things stand in the country?™Satyajit patted the excited man on the shoulder,
soothingly. Srinath controlled himself with visible effort.
His face saddened. ‚What is to be done?™ he moaned. ‚Thegroom™s father is a man of stone. He will break off themarriage unless cash is paid to him before the ceremonystarts. Who will ever marry Beena after such dishonour?™Satyajit wagged his head in befitting sympathy. ‚If onlyyou had written to me. Just two words or three. Anyway,
do not be worried. You will find another suitable match, a

better one maybe. Who can foresee the ways of destiny?™He felt for his purse the second time. He ought to restorethe fifty rupees he had cut. Let it be Rs 151. Even if therewould be no perambulator for his sonŠSrinath cleared his throat twice. ‚It shames me to tellyou the full story.™‚Yes?™
‚Harish is willing to pay.™‚What! you have just saidŠ™
‚He will pay against security. He wants security, thatevil-eyed shark. Your house and fish-pond. The madness!

To think that house and pond have more weight than a
millionaire™s signature!™Satyajit trembled within him. ‚House and pond,™ hemurmurmed to himself. The only possessions that had not
96Woven Words
toppled into the deluge. They were all he could give to hiswifeŠ‚All the old values destroyed, where will our India be?Has Nehru no sense to understand this? What! A pondweighs more than a millionaire™s word, a house is better
security than the signature of his hand! Yet, what else is
to be done?™ Palms folded together made supplication. ‚Whatelse is to be done in the daughter crisis?™Satyajit had a queer drugged look. And the dead voiceof the millionaire came from his throat. ‚Let the money-lender pay on those terms.™‚The insult, what about the insult?™ Srinath™s wrathfulhand cleaved the air. ‚When the thing is done, I will make

the shark rub his fat nose on the ground at your feet; I willdo that, be sure. You will also see the whole village spit at
the shark, thoo!™The deed was signed, the house was gay with marriagemusic. Satyajit walked off to the deep dark under the fig
tree, all by himself.‚What now,™ he said under his breath, and a dim smilepinched the corners of his lips as he stuck between themthe cork tip of a cigarette, the last one in the tin, and lifted
a lit match with slow tremulous deliberation.ABOUT THE AUTHORBhabani Bhattacharya (1906Œ1988), one of the foremostIndian writers of fiction in English, won acclaim for hisnovel, So Many Hungers (1947), which presents a vividpicture of the Bengal famine during World War II. He won
the Sahitya Akademi Award for Shadow from Ladakh (1966).He also wrote a number of short stories.
‚Glory at Twilight™ is taken from the collection, Steel Hawkand Other Stories.UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.Give reasons for the following
a.Satyajit attending the village wedding.

Glory at Twilight97b.Satyajit™s recollection of the forgerer when he was on the
train.c.Srinath and his family members™ eager expectation of
Satyajit™s arrival.d.Srinath™s disappointment with Satyajit.
e.Satyajit™s feeling that he was an impostor.
f.Satyajit not disclosing his present financial status to his
uncle.2.Describe the cycle of events in Satyajit™s life that brought him
back to where he began.TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss in pairs1.It is difficult to adjust to a fall from glory.

2.‚Failure had a tempo faster than success.™
3.Satyajit should have revealed his predicament to his uncle.
4.The author™s comment on crime and punishment.
APPRECIATION1.How is Satyajit™s financial crash introduced to the reader?
2.Comment on the way in which the story is narrated from
Satyajit™s perspective.3.How has the author used the episode of the bank theft to
comment on Satyajit™s success in his career?4.How do these lines capture the essence of the story:
       ‚Glory was all overlaid with dark shame. Glory was dead.™‚– let him be wrapped a while in the lingering twilight splendour
of departed glory™.LANGUAGE WORK1.Notice this description
Tall, thin, near forty, he had sharp features, the hair recedingon his temple in wide shiny patches. His eyes hated glare andhe wore smart eye-glasses to shield them. His mouth, thinlipped,would tighten in response to a line that suggested strength of
will but might have only been pride.
98Woven Words
Look at the padding of adjectives. Notice how physical featuresare related to mental qualities.a.Pick out other such descriptions of people from the story.b.Try writing out a description of a person you have observedclosely.2.Notice these expressions
‚We
 bask in your benediction. Our life-spark itself is held inyour fist.™‚This is her day. Let Beena alone wash and wipe the reverentfeet. All her life she will remember 
this honour befalling heron her auspicious day of her marriage.™How do they capture the Indian idiom?Underline other such expressions.3.Notice these fragments in para three of the lesson
a.The banking establishment of which he had attained control.b.The amazing tempo of it all.These are not complete sentences but serve to capture the
character™s train of thought. Such devices are often used increative writing.SUGGESTED READING1.An Astrologer™s Day and other Stories by R.K. Narayan.
