Hawk Roosting121Hawk RoostingTed HughesI sit in the top of the wood, my eyesclosed.Inaction, no falsifying dreamBetween my hooked head and hookedfeet:Or in sleep rehearse perfect kills and eat.The convenience of the high trees!The air™s buoyancy and the sub™s rayAre of advantage to me;
And the earth™s face upward for my inspection.My feet are locked upon the rough bark.It took the whole of CreationTo produce my foot, my each feather:
Now I hold Creation in my foot.Or fly up, and revolve it all slowlyŠI kill where I please because it is all mine.There is no sophistry in my body:My manners are tearing off heads.The allotment of death.For the one path of my flight is direct
Through the bones of the living.No arguments assert my right.The sun is behind me.Nothing has changed since I began,My eye has permitted no change.
I am going to keep things like this.7
122Woven Words
ABOUT THE POET Ted Hughes (1930Œ1998) completed hiseducation at Pembroke College, Cambridge. In1956, he married the poet Sylvia Plath. He triedto make a living in America by teaching andwriting. Finally, he returned to England.
The most remarkable quality of Hughes™ poems is an intenseand obsessive fascination with the world of birds andanimals; and though essentially about birds, animals and
fishes, his poems shock us with unusual phrases andviolent images.The above poem is in the form of a monologue.Notice the use of the following phrases in the poem and guess
what they mean in the contextair™s buoyancy               sophistry in my bodyUNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.Comment on the physical features of the hawk highlighted in
the poem and their significance.2.How does the poem emphasise the physical prowess of the hawk?
3.‚There is no sophistry in my body™Šthis statement expresses
the brutal frankness of the hawk. Does the poet suggestsomething through this statement?4.‚Now I hold Creation in my foot™Šexplain the centrality of this
assertion in the poem. What makes the hawk™s assertion of itsinvincibility so categorical?5.Why is the poem entitled ‚Hawk Roosting™?
6.Bring out the parallel suggested between the predatory instincts
of the bird and human behaviour.
TRY THIS OUT1.Consult a dictionary or an encyclopedia to differentiate between
the following birdseaglehawk
kitevulture

Hawk Roosting1232.To what aspects of human behaviour do the following adjectives
applyeagle-eyedhawkishSUGGESTED READING 1.‚The Lake™ by Ted Hughes
2.‚Poem in October™ by Dylan Thomas.

