56Woven Words
Pappachi™s MothArundhati RoyGuess the meaning of the following expressions from the contextignominy of retirementconical corneasslouch aroundweavingsullen circlesentomologist
taxonomic reshufflelepidopteristspernicious ghostMammachi had started making pickles commercially soonafter Pappachi retired from government service in Delhiand came to live in Ayemenem. The Kottayam Bible Societywas having a fair and asked Mammachi to make some ofher famous banana jam and tender mango pickle. It soldquickly, and Mammachi found that she had more orders
than she could cope with. Thrilled with her success, shedecided to persist with the pickles and jam, and soon foundherself busy all year round. Pappachi, for his part, was
having trouble coping with the ignominy of retirement. Hewas seventeen years older than Mammachi and realisedwith a shock that he was an old man when his wife was
still in her prime.Though Mammachi had conical corneas and wasalready practically blind, Pappachi would not help her withthe pickle-making, because he did not consider pickle-making a suitable job for a high-ranking ex-governmentofficial. He had always been a jealous man so he greatly
resented the attention his wife was suddenly getting. Heslouched around the compound in his immaculately tailoredsuits, weaving sullen circles around mounds of red chillies
and freshly powdered yellow turmeric, watching Mammachisupervise the buying, the weighing, the salting and drying,5
Pappachi™s Moth57of limes and tender mangoes. Every night he beat her witha brass flower vase. The beatings weren™t new. What was
new was only the frequency with which they took place.One night Pappachi broke the bow of Mammachi™s violinand threw it in the river.
Then Chacko came home for a summer vacation fromOxford. He had grown to be a big man and was, in thosedays, strong from rowing for Balliol. A week after he arrivedhe found Pappachi beating Mammachi in the study. Chackostrode into the room, caught Pappachi™s vase-hand andtwisted it around his back.‚I never want this to happen again,™ he told his father,
‚Ever.™
For the rest of that day Pappachi sat in the verandahand stared stonily out at the ornamental garden, ignoringthe plates of food that Kochu Maria brought him. Late atnight he went into his study and brought out his favourite
mahogany rocking chair. He put it down in the middle of
the driveway and smashed it into little bits with a plumber™smonkey wrench. He left it there in the moonlight, a heap ofvarnished wicker and splintered wood. He never touchedMammachi again. But he never spoke to her either as long
as he lived. When he needed anything he used Kochu Mariaor Baby Kochamma as intermediaries.In the evenings, when he knew visitors were expected,he would sit on the verandah and sew buttons that weren™t
missing onto his shirts, to create the impression thatMammachi neglected him. To some small degree he didsucceed in further corroding Ayemenem™s view of workingwives.He bought the skyblue Plymouth from an oldEnglishman in Munnar. He became a familiar sight in

Ayemenem, coasting importantly down the narrow road inhis wide car, looking outwardly elegant but sweating freely

inside his woollen suits. He wouldn™t allow Mammachi oranyone else in the family to use it, or even to sit in it. ThePlymouth was Pappachi™s revenge.Pappachi had been an Imperial Entomologist at thePusa Institute. After Independence, when the British left,
his designation was changed from Imperial Entomologist
58Woven Words
to Joint Director, Entomology. The year he retired, he had
risen to a rank equivalent to Director.
His life™s greatest setback was not having had the moththat he had discovered named after him.It fell into his drink one evening while he was sittingin the verandah of a rest house after a long day in thefield. As he picked it out he noticed its unusually densedorsal tufts. He took a closer look. With growing excitementhe mounted it, measured it and the next morning placed itin the sun for a few hours for the alcohol to evaporate.Then he caught the first train back to Delhi. To taxonomic
attention and, he  hoped, fame. After six unbearable monthsof anxiety, to Pappachi™s intense disappointment, he wastold that his moth had finally been identified as a slightlyunusual race of a well-known species that belonged to thetropical family, Lymantriidae.
The real blow came twelve years later, when, as a
consequence of a radical taxonomic reshuffle, lepidopterists
decided that Pappachi™s moth was in fact a separate speciesand genus hitherto unknown to science. By then, of course,Pappachi had retired and moved to Ayemenem. It was toolate for him to assert his claim to the discovery. His moth
was named after the Acting Director of the Department ofEntomology, a junior officer whom Pappachi had alwaysdisliked.In the years to come, even though he had been ill-humoured long before he discovered the moth, Pappachi™s
Moth was held responsible for his black moods and suddenbouts of temper. Its pernicious ghostŠgrey, furry and with
unusually dense dorsal tuftsŠhaunted every house thathe ever lived in. It tormented him and his children and his
children™s children.Until the day he died, even in the stifling Ayemenemheat, every single day, Pappachi wore a well-pressed three-
piece suit and his gold pocket watch. On his dressing table,next to his cologne and silver hair brush, he kept a pictureof himself as a young man, with his hair slicked down,
taken in a photographer™s studio in Vienna where he haddone the six-month diploma course that had qualified himto apply for the post of Imperial Entomologist. It was during
Pappachi™s Moth59those few months they spent in Vienna that Mammachitook her first lessons on the violin. The lessons were
abruptly discontinued when Mammachi™s teacher, Launsky-
Tieffenthal, made the mistake of telling Pappachi that his
wife was exceptionally talented and, in his opinion,
potentially concert class.Mammachi pasted, in the family photograph album,the clipping from the Indian Express that reportedPappachi™s death. It said:Noted entomologist, Shri Benaan John Ipe, son of late Rev.E.John Ipe of Ayemenem (popularly known as Punnyan
Kunju), suffered a massive heart attack and passed awayat the Kottayam General Hospital last night. He developedchest pains around 1.05 a.m. and was rushed to hospital.
The end came at 2.45 a.m. Shri Ipe had been keepingindifferent health since last six months. He is survived byhis wife Soshamma and two children.At Pappachi™s funeral, Mammachi cried and her contactlenses slid around in her eyes. Ammu told the twins thatMammachi was crying more because she was used to himthan because she loved him. She was used to having himslouching around the pickle factory, and was used to being
beaten from time to time. Ammu said that human beingswere creatures of habit, and it was amazing the kind ofthings they could get used to. You only had to look around
you, Ammu said, to see that beatings with brass vaseswere the least of them.ABOUT THE AUTHORArundhati Roy, an architect by training, is anovelist and screen writer. Her first novel, 
TheGod of Small Things, from which this extracthas been selected, is the winner of the 1997Booker Prize, a prestigious literary award. Shenow lives in New Delhi and is an activist.
60Woven Words
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.Comment on the relationship shared by Mammachi and
Pappachi.2.How does Mammachi stand out as an independent and resilient
woman in the text?3.Why does John Ipe consider retirement to be a dishonour?
4.What was the underlying reason for John Ipe™s disgust with the
world?TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss in pairs1.Chacko™s firmness in dealing with the irrational behaviour of
his father.
2.The contrast between the outward elegance of a person and his
private behaviour.
3.Approval from the outside world and approval within the family.
APPRECIATION1.How does the author succeed in raising crucial social issues
not through open criticism but through subtle suggestion?2.Within a few pages the author has packed the important events
in the lives of John Ipe and his wife. Discuss how concisenessand economy of expression can achieve effective portrayal ofentire lives.3.    Identify instances of ironical comment in the story.LANGUAGE WORK1.Entomologist and lepidopterist are mentioned in the text andyou must have guessed the meanings of these words or foundthem out from the dictionary.Now match the kinds of scientists given below with the workthey do:                        A                                            B
ornithologiststudy of the skingerontologist                       study of cells
Pappachi™s Moth61ergonomist                          study of birdsdermatologist                      study of old age
cytologiststudy of design of equipment2.A short report announcing the death of a person in a newspaper
is called an ‚obituary™. Where would you find the followinga citationan 
epitapha glo
ssaryan abstracta 
postscriptNecessity is said to be the mother of invention. Read this piecebelow on the invention of the Braille system to help the visually
impaired.READING FOR THE BLINDUntil 1819, learning material for the blind was provided by
using letters of the alphabet made of wood, lead, twigs or,

sometimes, pins arranged in large pincushions. The RoyalInstitute for Young Blind Persons in Paris used three-inch
deep letters made from cloth.In 1918, a ten year old blind boy named Louis Braille enrolledat the Institute. It was around this time that Captain Barbierde la Serre devised an alphabet of raised dots and dashes
embossed on strips of cardboard. He called it ‚night writing™
because soldiers could use it to ‚read™ with their fingertips
when in action at night.His system, however, was not a success because it was too
complicated: it used an arrangement of twelve dots to each
letter. Braille, now a teenager, became interested in this

system. He simplified it and developed the present
internationally used Braille system.
