140Woven Words
Ajamil and the Tigers
Arun KolatkarThe tiger people went to their kingand said, ‚We™re starving.

We™ve had nothing  to eat,
not a bite,for 15 days and 16 nights.
Ajamil has gota new sheep dog.He cramps our styleand won™t let us get within a mileof meat.™‚That™s shocking,™said the tiger king.
‚Why didn™t you come to see me before?Make preparations for a banquet.I™m gonna teach that sheep dog a lesson he™ll never
forget.™‚Hear hear,™ said the tigers.
‚Careful,™ said the queen.
But he was already gone.Aloneinto the darkness before the dawn.In an hour he was back,the good king.
A black patch on his eye.His tail in a sling.And said, ‚I™ve got it all plannednow that I know the lie of the land.All of us will have to try.We™ll outnumber the son of a bitch.
12
Ajamil and the Tigers
141And this time there will be no hitch.Because this time I shall be leading the attack.™Quick as lightningthe sheep dog was.
He took them all in as prisoners of war,
the 50 tigers and the tiger king,before they could get their pawson a single sheep.They never had a chance.The dog was in 51 places all at once.
He strung them all out in a daisy chainand flung them in front of his boss in one big heap.‚Nice dog you got there, Ajamil,™said the tiger king.Looking a little ill
and spiting out a tooth.‚But there™s been a bit of a misunderstanding.We could™ve wiped out your herd in one clean sweep.
But we were not trying to creep up on your sheep.We feel that means are more important than ends.

We were coming to see you as friends.
And that™s the truth.™The sheep dog was the typewho had never told a lie in his lifeHe was built along simpler linesand he was simply disgusted.He kept on making frantic signs.But Ajamil, the good shepherd
refused to meet his eyesand pretended to believe every single wordof what the tiger king said.
And seemed to be taken in by all the lies.Ajamil cut them looseand asked them all to stay for dinner.
It was an offer the tigers couldn™t refuse.And after the lamb chops and the roast,
142Woven Words
when Ajamil proposedthey sign a long term friendship treaty,
all the tigers roared.‚We couldn™t agree with you more.™
And swore they would be good friends all their lives
as they put down the forks and the knives.Ajamil signed a pactwith the tiger people and sent them back.Laden with gifts of sheep, leather jackets and balls ofwool.
Ajamil wasn™t a fool.Like all good shepherds he knewthat even tigers have got to eat some time.A good shepherd sees to it they do.He is free to play a flute all dayas well fed tigers and fat sheep drink from the same
pondwith a full stomach for a common bond.ABOUT THE POET Arun Kolatkar is a contemporary Indian poet. He waseducated in Pune and earned a diploma in painting fromthe J.J. School of arts, Mumbai. He writes both in Englishand Marathi and has authored two books. The presentpoem is an excerpt from JejuriŠ a long poem in thirty-onesections. A German translation of Jejuri by GievanenBandin was published in 1984.UNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.The poem has a literal level and a figurative level. Why has the
poet chosen ‚tigers™ and ‚sheep™ to convey his message?2.What facet of political life does the behaviour of Ajamil illustrate?
3.Why have the words, ‚pretended™ and ‚seemed™ been used in the
lines:
...pretended to believe every single wordof what the tiger king said.
Ajamil and the Tigers
143And seemed to be taken in by all the lies.How does the sense of these lines connect with the line ‚Ajamilwasn™t a fool™?4.Why did Ajamil refuse to meet the sheepdog™s eyes?
5.‚He is free to play a flute all day as well fed tigers and fat sheep
drink from the same pond with a full stomach for a common
bond.™What do the phrases ‚play the flute all day™ and ‚a common bond™refer to?6.The poem is a satire against the present political class. How
effectively does it convey the anger and anguish of the common
man trapped in the system?TRY THIS OUTFind out the difference between these literary forms(a) fable  (b) allegory (c) satire.SUGGESTED READING 1.Jejuri by Arun Kolatkar.

