The Adventure of the Three Garridebs37The Adventure of the ThreeGarridebsArthur Conan DoyleLook for these expressions in the text and guess what they mean
from the contextwith a disconsolate air            of 
sinister and murderous  reputation
want of imaginative intuition      penitentiarydevilish ingenuityconfederate in crimeshamefaced grindissipated dreams

rigmarole of liessyncopated dialoguecadaverous faceIt may have been a comedy, or it may have been a tragedy.It cost one man his reason, it cost me a blood-letting, andit cost yet another man the penalties of the law. Yet there
was certainly an element of comedy. Well, you shall judge
for yourselves.I remember the date very well, for, it was in the same
month that Holmes refused a knighthood for services whichmay perhaps some day be described. I only refer to thematter in passing, for, in my position of partner and
confidant I am obliged to be particularly careful to avoidany indiscretion. I repeat, however, that this enables me to

fix the date, which was the latter end of June 1902, shortlyafter the conclusion of the South African War. Holmes had
spent several days in bed, as was his habit from time totime, but he emerged that morning with a long foolscapdocument in his hand and a twinkle of amusement in hisaustere grey eyes.‚There is a chance for you to make some money, friendWatson,™ said he. ‚Have you ever heard the name of Garrideb?™
4
38Woven Words
I admitted that I had not.‚Well, if you can lay your hand upon a Garrideb, there™s
money in it.™‚Why?™‚Ah, that™s a long storyŠrather a whimsical one, too. Idon™t think in all our explorations of human complexitieswe have ever come upon anything more singular. The fellow
will be here presently for cross-examination, so I won™topen the matter up till he comes. But meanwhile, that™sthe name we want.™The telephone directory lay on the table beside me andI turned over the pages in a rather hopeless quest. But to
my amazement there was this strange name in its dueplace. I gave a cry of triumph.Here you are Holmes! Here it is!™Holmes took the book from my hand.‚Garrideb, N.™ he read, ‚136, Little Ryder Street, W. Sorry
to disappoint you, my dear Watson, but this is the man
himself. That is the address upon his letter. We want
another to match him.™Mrs Hudson had come in with a card upon a tray. Itook it up and glanced at it.‚Why, here it is!™ I cried in amazement. ‚This is a differentinitial. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, Moorville, Kansas, U.S.A.™Holmes smiled as he looked at the card. ‚I am afraidyou must make yet another effort, Watson,™ said he. ‚This
gentleman is also in the plot already, though I certainlydid not expect to see him this morning. However, he is in a
position to tell us a good deal which I want to know.™A moment later he was in the room. Mr John Garrideb,Counsellor at Law, was a short, powerful man with theround, fresh clean-shaven face characteristic of so manyAmerican men of affairs. The general effect was chubbyand rather childlike, so that one received the impression
of quite a young man with a broad set smile upon his face.His eyes, however, were arresting. Seldom in any human
head have I seen a pair which bespoke a more intense
inward life, so bright were they, so alert, so responsive toevery change of thought. His accent was American but wasnot accompanied by any eccentricity of speech.
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs39‚Mr Holmes?™ he asked, glancing from one to the other.
‚Ah, yes! Your pictures are not unlike  you, sir, if I may say
so I believe you have had a letter from my namesake, MrNathan Garrideb, have you not?™‚Pray sit down,™ said Sherlock Holmes. We shall, I fancy,
have a good deal to discuss.™ He took up his sheets offoolscap.You are, of course, the Mr John Garrideb mentioned in this
document. But surely you have been in England some time?™‚Why do you say that, Mr Holmes?™ I seemed to readsudden suspicion in those expressive eyes.‚Your whole outfit is English.™

Mr Garrideb forced a laugh. ‚I™ve read of your tricks,Mr Holmes, but I never thought I would be the subject ofthem. Where do you read that?™‚The shoulder cut of your coat, the toes of your bootsŠcould anyone doubt it?™‚Well, well, I had no idea I was so obvious a Britisher.
But business brought me over here some time ago and so,
as you say, my outfit is nearly all London. However, I guess
your time is of value and we did not meet to talk about thecut of my socks. What about getting down to that paper
you hold in your hand?™Holmes had, in some way, ruffled our visitor, whose
chubby face had assumed a far less amiable expression.‚Patience! Patience, Mr Garrideb!™ said my friend in asoothing voice. ‚Dr Watson would tell you that these little

digressions of mine sometimes prove in the end to havesome bearing on the matter. But why did Mr Nathan
Garrideb not come with you?™‚Why did he ever drag you into it at all?™ asked ourvisitor, with a sudden outflame of anger. ‚What in thunder

had you to do with it? Here was a bit of professional businessbetween two gentlemen, and one of them must need call in
a detective! I saw him this morning and he told me thisfool-trick he had played on me, and that™s why I am here.But I feel bad about it, all the same.™‚There was no reflection upon you, Mr Garrideb. It wassimply zeal upon his part to gain your endŠan end which
is, I understand, equally vital for both of you. He knew that
40Woven Words
I had means of getting information and, therefore, it wasvery natural that he should apply to me.™Our visitor™s angry face gradually cleared.‚Well, that puts it different,™ said he, ‚When I went to
see him this morning and he told me he had sent for adetective, I just asked for your address and came rightaway. I don™t want police butting into a private matter. But
if you are content just to help us find the man, there canbe no harm in that.™‚Well, that is just how it stands,™ said Holmes. ‚And
now, sir, since you are here, we had best have a clear

account from your own lips. My friend here knows nothingof the details.™Mr Garrideb surveyed me with not too friendly a gaze.‚Need he know?™ he asked.‚We usually work together.™
‚Well, there™s no reason it should be kept a secret.
I™ll give you the facts as short as I can make them. Ifyou came from Kansas I would not need to explain toyou who Alexander Hamilton Garrideb was. He madehis money in real estate and, afterwards, in the wheatpit at Chicago, but he spent it in buying up as much
land as would make one of your counties, lying alongthe Arkansas River, west of Fort Dodge. It™s grazing land
and lumber land and Arabic land and mineralised land,
and just every sort of land that brings dollars to theman that owns it.‚He had no kith nor kinŠor, if he had, I never heard of
it. But he took a kind of pride in the queerness of hisname. That was what brought us together. I was in the law
at Topeka, and one day I had a visit from the old man and
he was tickled to death to meet another man with his ownname. It was his pet fad and he was dead set to find out ifthere were any more Garridebs in the world. ‚Find me
another!™ said he. I told him I was a busy man and couldnot spend my life hiking round the world in search ofGarridebs. ‚None the less,™ said he, ‚that is just what you
will do if things pan out as I planned them.™ I thought hewas joking, but there was a powerful lot of meaning in thewords, as I was soon to discover.

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs41‚For he died within a year of saying them and he left awill behind him. It was the queerest will that has everbeen filed in the State of Kansas. His property was dividedinto three parts and I was to have one on condition that Ifound two Garridebs who would share the remainder. It™s

five million dollars for each if it is a cent, but we can™t lay afinger on it until we all three stand in a row.‚It was so big a chance that I just let my legal practiceslide and I set forth looking for Garridebs. There is not one
in the United States. I went through it, sir, with a fine-
toothed comb and never a Garrideb could I catch. Then I
tried the old country. Sure enough there was the name inthe London Telephone Directory. I went after him two daysago and explained the whole matter to him. But he is alone man, like myself, with some women relations, but nomen. It says three adult men in the will. So you see we stillhave a vacancy and if you can help to fill it we will be very
ready to pay your charges.™‚Well, Watson,™ said Holmes, with a smile, ‚I said it was
rather whimsical, did I not? I should have thought, sir,
that your obvious way was to advertise in the agonycolumns of the papers.™‚I have done that, Mr Holmes. No replies.™‚Dear me! Well, it is certainly a most curious little
problem. I may take a glance at it in my leisure. By theway, it is curious that you should have come from Topeka.I used to have a correspondentŠhe is dead nowŠold DrLysander Starr, who was Mayor in 1890.™
‚Good old Dr Starr!™ said our visitor. ‚His name is still
honoured. Well, Mr Holmes, I suppose all we can do is to

report to you and let you know how we progress. I reckon
you will hear within a day or two.™ With this assurance ourAmerican bowed and departed.Holmes had lit his pipe, and he sat for some time witha curious smile upon his face.‚Well?™ I asked at last.
‚I am wondering, WatsonŠjust wondering!™

‚At what?™Holmes took his pipe from his lips.‚I was wondering, Watson, what on earth could be the

42Woven Words
object of this man in telling us such a rigmarole of lies. Inearly asked him soŠfor there are times when a brutal
frontal attack is the best policyŠbut I judged it better tolet him think he had fooled us. Here is a man with anEnglish coat frayed at the elbow and trousers bagged at
the knee with a year™s wear, and yet by this document and
by his own account he is a provincial American lately landedin London. There have been no advertisements in the agonycolumns. You know that I miss nothing there. They are my
favourite covert for putting up a bird and I would neverhave overlooked such a cock pheasant as that. I never knew
a Dr Lysander Starr of Topeka. Touch him where you would
he was false. I think the fellow is really an American, buthe has worn his accent smooth with years of London. Whatis his game, then, and what motive lies behind thispreposterous search for Garridebs? It™s worth our attention,for, granting that the man is a rascal, he is certainly a

complex and ingenious one. We must now find out if our
other correspondent is a fraud also. Just ring him up,Watson.™
I did so, and heard a thin, quavering voice at the otherend of the line.‚Yes, yes, I am Mr Nathan Garrideb. Is Mr Holmes there?
I should very much like to have a word with Mr Holmes.™My friend took the instrument and I heard the usualsyncopated dialogue.‚Yes, he has been here. I understand that you don™t
know him– How long? Only two days!... Yes, yes, of courseit is a most captivating prospect. Will you be at home thisevening? I suppose your namesake will not be there?...Very good, we will come then, for I would rather have a

chat without him– Dr Watson will come with me– I
understood from your note that  you did not go out often–Well, we shall be round about six. You need not mention it

to the American lawyer– Very good. Good-bye!™It was twilight of a lovely spring evening and even LittleRyder Street, one of the smaller offshoots from the Edgware

Road, within a stone-cast of old Tyburn Tree of evil memory,
looked golden and wonderful in the slanting rays of thesetting sun. The particular house to which we were directed
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs43was a large, old-fashioned, Early Georgian edifice with afat brick face broken only by two deep bay windows on the
ground floor. It was on this ground floor that our client
lived and, indeed, the low windows proved to be the front ofthe huge room in which he spent his waking hours. Holmes
pointed as we passed to the small brass plate which borethe curious name.‚Up some years, Watson,™ he remarked, indicating its
discoloured surface. ‚It™s his real name, anyhow, and that
is something to note.™The house had a common stair and there were anumber of names painted in the hall, some indicating offices
and some private chambers. It was not a collection ofresidential flats, but rather the abode of Bohemianbachelors. Our client opened the door for us himself andapologised by saying that the woman in charge left at fouro™clock. Mr Nathan Garrideb proved to be a very tall, loose
jointed, round-backed person, gaunt and bald, some sixty-odd years of age. He had a cadaverous face, with the dulldead skin of a man to whom exercise was unknown. Largeround spectacles and a small projecting goat™s beardcombined with his stooping attitude to give him an
expression of peering curiosity. The general effect, however,
was amiable, though eccentric.The room was as curious as its occupant. It looked likea small museum. It was both broad and deep, with
cupboards and cabinets all round, crowded with specimens,geological and anatomical. Cases of butterflies and mothsflanked each side of the entrance. A large table in the centrewas  littered with all sorts of debris, while the tall brasstube of a powerful microscope bristled up amongst them.
As I glanced round I was surprised at the universality ofthe man™s interests. Here was a case of ancient coins. Therewas a cabinet of flint instruments. Behind his central table
was a large cupboard of fossil bones. Above was a line ofplaster skulls with such names as ‚Neanderthal™,‚Heidelberg,™ ‚Cromagnan™ printed beneath them. It was clear
that he was a student of many subjects. As he stood infront of us now, he held a piece of chamois leather in hisright hand with which he was polishing a coin.
44Woven Words
‚SyracusanŠof the best period,™ he explained, holdingit up. ‚They degenerated greatly towards the end. At theirbest I hold them supreme, though some prefer theAlexandrian school. You will find a chair here, Mr Holmes.
Pray allow me to clear these bones. And you, sirŠah, yes,
Dr WatsonŠif you would have the goodness to put the
Japanese vase to one side. You see round me my little
interests in life. My doctor lectures me about never goingout, but why should I go out when I have so much to holdme here? I can assure you that the adequate cataloguingof one of those cabinets would take me three good months.™Holmes looked round him with curiosity.‚But do you tell me that you never go out?™ he said.‚Now and again I drive down to Sotheby™s or Christie™s.Otherwise I very seldom leave my room. I am not too strongand my researches are very absorbing. But you canimagine, Mr Holmes, what a terrific shockŠpleasant but
terrificŠit was for me when I heard of this unparalleledgood fortune. It only needs one more Garrideb to completethe matter and surely we can find one; I had a brother, but
he is dead, and female relatives are disqualified. But theremust surely be others in the world. I had heard that you
handled strange cases, and that was why I sent for you. Ofcourse, this American gentleman is quite right, and I shouldhave taken his advice first, but I acted for the best.™‚I think you acted very wisely indeed,™ said Holmes.‚But are you really anxious to acquire an estate in America?™‚Certainly not, sir. Nothing would induce me to leave
my collection. But this gentleman has assured me thathe will buy me out as soon as we have established ourclaim. Five million dollars was the sum named. There are
a dozen specimens in the market at the present momentwhich fill gaps in my collection, and which I am unable topurchase for want of a few hundred pounds. Just think
what I could do with five million dollars. Why, I have thenucleus of a national collection. I shall be the Hans Sloaneof my age.™His eyes gleamed behind his great spectacles. It wasvery clear that no pains would be spared by Mr Nathan
Garrideb in finding a namesake.
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs45‚I merely called to make your acquaintance and thereis no reason why I should interrupt your studies,™ saidHolmes. ‚I prefer to establish personal touch with thosewith whom I do business. There are few questions I needask, for I have your very clear narrative in my pocket and I
filled up the blanks when this American gentleman called.I understand that up to this week you were unaware of hisexistence.™‚That is so. He called last Tuesday.™‚Did he tell you of our interview today?™‚Yes, he came straight back to me. He had been very
angry.™‚Why should he be angry?™
‚He seemed to think it was some reflection on hishonour. But he was quite cheerful again when he returned.™
‚Did he suggest any course of action?™‚No, sir, he did not.™

‚Has he had, or asked for, any money from you?™
‚No, sir, never!™
‚You see no possible object he has in view?™
‚None, except what he states.™‚Did you tell him of our telephone appointment?™
‚Yes, sir, I did.™
Holmes was lost in thought. I could see that he waspuzzled.‚Have you any articles of great value in your collection?™
‚No, sir. I am not a rich man. It is a good collection, but
not a very valuable one.™‚You have no fear of burglars?™
‚Not the least.™‚How long have you been in these rooms?™
‚Nearly five years.™Holmes™s cross-examination was interrupted by animperative knocking at the door. No sooner had our client
unlatched it than the American lawyer burst excitedly intothe room.‚Here you are!™ he cried, waving a paper over his head.‚I thought I should be in time to get you. Mr Nathan Garrideb,
my congratulations! You are a rich man, sir. Our business
is happily finished and all is well. As to you, Mr Holmes,
46Woven Words
we can only say we are sorry if we have given you anyuseless trouble.™He handed over the paper to our client, who stoodstaring at a marked advertisement. Holmes and I leanedforward and read it over his shoulder. This is how it ranŠ
HOWARD GARRIDEB
Constructor of Agricultural Machinery. Binders, reapers™steam and hand plows, drills, harrows, farmers™ carts,
buck-boards, and all other appliances. Estimates forArtesian Wells. Apply Grosvenor Buildings, Aston.
‚Glorious!™ gasped our host. ‚That makes our third man.™‚I had opened up inquiries in Birmingham,™ said theAmerican, ‚and my agent there has sent me thisadvertisement from a local paper. We must hustle and put
the thing through. I have written to this man and told himthat you will see him in his office tomorrow afternoon atfour o™clock.™‚You want me to see him?™

‚What do you say, Mr Holmes? Don™t you think it wouldbe wiser? Here am I, a wandering American with a wonderfultale. Why should he believe what I tell him? But you are aBritisher with solid references and he is bound to take
notice of what you say. I would go with you if you wished,but I have a very busy day tomorrow and I could alwaysfollow you if you are in any trouble.™‚Well, I have not made such a journey for years.™
‚It is nothing, Mr Garrideb. I have figured out yourconnections. You leave at twelve and should be there soon
after two. Then you can be back the same night. All youhave to do is to see this man, explain the matter and getan affidavit of his existence. By the Lord!™ he added, hotly,
‚considering I™ve come all the way from the centre of America,it is surely little enough if you go a hundred miles in orderto put this matter through.™‚Quite so,™ said Holmes. ‚I think what this gentlemansays is very true.™Mr Nathan Garrideb shrugged his shoulders with adisconsolate air. ‚Well, If you insist I shall go,™ said he. ‚It is

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs47certainly hard for me to refuse you anything, consideringthe glory of hope that you have brought into my life.™‚Then that is agreed,™ said Holmes, ‚and no doubt youwill let me have a report as soon as you can.™‚I™ll see to that,™ said the American. ‚Well,™ he added,
looking at his watch, ‚I™ll have to get on. I™ll call tomorrow,Mr Nathan, and see you off to Birmingham. Coming myway, Mr Holmes? Well, then, good-bye and we may have
good news for you tomorrow night.™I noticed that my friend™s face cleared when theAmerican left the room and the look of thoughtful perplexity
had vanished.‚I wish I could look over your collection, Mr Garrideb,™said he. ‚In my profession all sorts of odd knowledge comesuseful and this room of yours is a storehouse of it.™Our client shone with pleasure and his eyes gleamedfrom behind his big glasses.‚I had always heard, sir, that you were a very intelligent
man,™ said he. ‚I could take you round now, if you have the
time.™‚Unfortunately, I have not. But these specimens are sowell labelled and classified that they hardly need your
personal explanation. If I should be able to look in tomorrow,I presume that there would be no objection to my glancingover them?™‚None at all. You are most welcome. The place will, of
course, be shut up, but Mrs Saunders is in the basement
up to four o™clock and would let you in with her key.™‚Well, I happen to be clear tomorrow afternoon. If you
would say a word to Mrs Saunders it would be quite in
order. By the way, who is your house-agent?™
Our client was amazed at the sudden question.‚Holloway and Steele, in the Edgware Road. But why?™‚I am a bit of an archaeologist myself when it comes tohouses,™ said Holmes, laughing. ‚I was wondering if thiswas Queen Anne or Georgian.™‚Georgian, beyond doubt.™‚Really. I should have thought a little earlier. However,
it is easily ascertained. Well, good-bye, Mr Garrideb and

may you have every success in your Birmingham journey.™
48Woven Words
The house-agent™s was close by, but we found that itwas closed for the day, so we made our way back to BakerStreet. It was not till after dinner that Holmes reverted tothe subject.‚Our little problem draws to a close,™ said he. ‚No doubtyou have outlined the solution in your own mind.™‚I can make neither head nor tail of it.™‚The head is surely clear enough and the tail we shouldsee tomorrow. Did you notice nothing curious about thatadvertisement?™‚I saw that the word ‚plough™ was misspelt.™‚Oh, you did notice that, did you? Come, Watson, you
improve all the time. Yes, it was bad English but good

American. The printer had set it up as received. Then thebuckboards. That is American also. And artesian wells arecommoner with them than with us. It was a typicalAmerican advertisement, but purporting to be from an
English firm. What do you make of that?™‚I can only suppose that this American lawyer put it inhimself. What his object was I fail to understand.™‚Well, there are alternative explanations. Anyhow, he
wanted to get this good old fossil up to Birmingham. That
is very clear. I might have told him that he was clearly
going on a wild-goose chase, but, on second thoughts, itseemed better to clear the stage by letting him go. Tomorrow,
WatsonŠwell, tomorrow will speak for itself.™
Holmes was up and out early. When he returned atlunch-time I noticed  that his face was very grave.‚This is a more serious matter than I had expected,Watson,™ said he. ‚It is fair to tell you so, though I know it

will only be an additional reason to you for running your
head into danger. I should know my Watson by now. But
there is danger, and you should know it.™
‚Well, it is not the first we have shared, Holmes. I hope
it may not be the last. What is the particular danger this
time?™‚We are up against a very hard case. I have identified
Mr John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law. He is none other
than ‚Killer™ Evans, of sinister and murderous reputation.™‚I fear I am none the wiser.™

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs49‚Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry about aportable Newgate Calendar in your memory. I have beendown to see friend Lestrade at the Yard. There may be an
occasional want of imaginative intuition down there, butthey lead the world for thoroughness and method. I had an
idea that we might get on the track of our American friendin their records. Sure enough, I found his chubby facesmiling up at me from the Rogues™ Portrait Gallery. JamesWinter, alias Morecroft, alias Killer Evans, was the
inscription below.™ Holmes drew an envelope from his pocket.‚I scribbled down a few points from his dossier. Aged forty

four. Native of Chicago. Known to have shot three men in
the States. Escaped from penitentiary through politicalinfluence. Came to London in 1893. Shot a man over cardsin a night club in the Waterloo Road in January, 1895.
Man died, but he was shown to have been the aggressor inthe row. Dead man was identified as Rodger Presbury,
famous as forger and coiner in Chicago. Killer Evansreleased in 1901. Has been under police supervision since,but so far as known has led an honest life. Very dangerous
man, usually carries arms and is prepared to use them.That is our bird, WatsonŠa sporting bird, as you must

admit.™‚But what is his game?™
‚Well, it begins to define itself. I have been to the house-
agents. Our client, as he told us, has been there five years.It was unlet for a year before then. The previous tenantwas a gentleman at large named Waldron. Waldron™s
appearance was well remembered at the office. He hadsuddenly vanished and nothing more been heard of him.He was a tall, bearded man with very dark features. Now,
Presbury, the man whom Killer Evans had shot, was,according to Scotland Yard, a tall, dark man with a beard.
As a working hypothesis, I think we may take it that
Presbury, the American criminal, used to live in the veryroom which our innocent friend now devotes to his museum.So at last we get a link, you see.™‚And the next link?™‚Well, we must go now and look for that.™
He took a revolver from the drawer and handed it to me.

50Woven Words
‚I have my old favourite with me. If our Wild West friend
tries to live up to his nickname, we must be ready for him.I™ll give you an hour for a siesta, Watson, and then I think
it will be time for our Ryder Street adventure.™
It was just four o™clock when we reached the curiousapartment of Nathan Garrideb. Mrs Saunders, thecaretaker, was about to leave but she had no hesitation in
admitting us, for the door shut with a spring lock andHolmes promised to see that all was safe before we left.Shortly afterwards the outer door closed, her bonnet passedthe bow window and we knew that we were alone in the
lower floor of the house. Holmes made a rapid examinationof the premises. There was one cupboard in a dark cornerwhich stood out a little from the wall. It was behind thisthat we eventually crouched, while Holmes in a whisperoutlined his intentions.‚He wanted to get our amiable friend out of his roomŠthat is very clear and, as the collector never went out, it
took some planning to do it. The whole of this Garridebinvention was apparently for no other end. I must say,Watson, that there is a certain devilish ingenuity about it,
even if the queer name of the tenant did give him an opening
which he could hardly have expected. He wove his plotwith remarkable cunning.™‚But what did he want?™‚Well, that is what we are here to find out. It has nothing
whatever to do with our client, so far as I can read the
situation. It is something connected with the man hemurderedŠthe man who may have been his confederate incrime. There is some guilty secret in the room. That is howI read it. At first I thought our friend might have something
in his collection more valuable than he knewŠsomethingworth the attention of a big criminal. But the fact thatRodger Presbury of evil memory inhabited these rooms points
to some deeper reason. Well, Watson, we can but possess
our souls in patience and see what the hour may bring.™That hour was not long in striking. We crouched closer
in the shadow as we heard the outer door open and shut.
Then came the sharp, metallic snap of a key and theAmerican was in the room. He closed the door softly behind
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs51him, took a sharp glance around him to see that all wassafe, threw off his overcoat and walked up to the central
table with the brisk manner of one who knows exactly whathe has to do and how to do it. He pushed the table to oneside, tore up the square of carpet on which it rested, rolled
it completely back and then, drawing a jimmy from hisinside pocket, he knelt down and worked vigorously uponthe floor. Presently we heard the sound of sliding boards
and, an instant later, a square had opened in the planks.
Killer Evans struck a match, lit a stump of candle, andvanished from our view.Clearly our moment had come. Holmes touched mywrist as a signal and together we stole across to the
open trapdoor. Gently as we moved, however, the old floor
must have creaked under our feet, for the head of ourAmerican, peering anxiously round, emerged suddenlyfrom the open space. His face turned upon us with a
glare of baffled rage, which gradually softened into arather shamefaced grin as he realised that two pistolswere pointed at his head.‚Well, well!™ said he, coolly as he scrambled to the
surface. ‚I guess you have been one too many for me, Mr
Holmes. Saw through my game, I suppose and played mefor a sucker from the first. Well, sir, I hand it to you; you
have me beat andŠ™In an instant he had whisked out a revolver from hisbreast  pocket and had fired two shots. I felt a sudden hot
sear as if a red-hot iron had been pressed to my thigh.There was a crash as Holmes™s pistol came down on theman™s head. I had a vision of him sprawling upon the floorwith blood running down his face while Holmes rummaged
him for weapons. Then my friend™s wiry arms were roundme and he was leading me to a chair.
‚You™re not hurt, Watson? For God™s sake, say that you
are not hurt!™It was worth a woundŠit was worth many woundsŠtoknow the depth of loyalty and love which lay behind thatcold mask. The clear, hard eyes were dimmed for a moment
and the firm lips were shaking. For the one and only time Icaught a glimpse of a great heart as well as of a great
52Woven Words
brain. All my years of humble but single-minded serviceculminated in that moment of revelation.‚It™s nothing, Holmes. It™s a mere scratch.™He had ripped up my trousers with his pocket-knife.‚You are right,™ he cried, with an immense sigh of relief.
‚It is quite superficial.™ His face set like flint as he glared atour prisoner who was sitting up with a dazed face. ‚By theLord, it is as well for you. If you had killed Watson, you
would not have got out of this room alive. Now, sir, what
have you to say for yourself?™He had nothing to say for himself. He only lay andscowled. I leaned on Holmes™s arm and together we looked
down into the small cellar which had been disclosed by thesecret flap. It was still illuminated by the candle whichEvans had taken down with him. Our eyes fell upon amass of rusted machinery, great rolls of paper, a litter of
bottles and, neatly arranged upon a small table, a number
of neat little bundles.‚A printing pressŠa counterfeiter™s outfit,™ said Holmes.
‚Yes, sir,™ said our prisoner, staggering slowly to his
feet and then sinking into the chair. ‚The greatest

counterfeiter London ever saw. That™s Presbury™s machine
and those bundles on the table are two thousand ofPresbury™s notes worth a hundred each and fit to passanywhere. Help yourselves, gentlemen. Call it a deal and
let me beat it.™Holmes laughed.
‚We don™t do things like that, Mr Evans. There is no
bolt-hole for you in this country. You shot this man,
Presbury, did you not?™‚Yes, sir, and got five years for it, though it was he who
pulled on me. Five yearsŠwhen I should have had a medal
the size of a soup plate. No living man could tell a Presburyfrom a Bank of England, and if I hadn™t put him out he
would have flooded London with them. I was the only one inthe world who knew where he made them. Can you wonderthat I wanted to get to the place? And can you wonder that
when I found this crazy boob of a bughunter with the queername squatting right on the top of it, and never quitting hisroom, I had to do the best I could to shift him? Maybe I
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs53would have been wiser if I had put him away. It would havebeen easy enough, but I™m a soft-hearted guy that can™t begin
shooting unless the other man has a gun also. But say, MrHolmes, what have I done wrong, anyhow? I™ve not used thisplant. I™ve not hurt this old stiff. Where do you get me?™‚Only attempted murder, so far as I can see,™ said Holmes.
‚But that™s not our job. They take that at the next stage.What we wanted at present was just your sweet self. Pleasegive the Yard a call, Watson. It won™t be entirely unexpected.™
So those were the facts about Killer Evans and hisremarkable invention of the three Garridebs. We heard later

that our poor old friend never got over the shock of hisdissipated dreams. When his castle in the air fell down, itburied him beneath the ruins. He was last heard of at anursing home in Brixton. It was a glad day at the Yard
when the Presbury outfit was discovered for, though they
knew that it existed, they had never been able, after the
death of the man, to find out where it was. Evans hadindeed done great service and caused several worthy CIDmen to sleep the sounder, for the counterfeiter stands in a
class by himself as a public danger. They would willingly
have subscribed to that soup-plate medal of which the
criminal had spoken, but an unappreciative Bench took aless favourite view and the Killer returned to those shadesfrom which he had just emerged.ABOUT THE AUTHORArthur Conan Doyle (1859Œ1930), who wasa medical practitioner, is well known for his
detective stories. His creationsŠthe
detective Sherlock Holmes and the
chronicler, Dr WatsonŠare well known the
world over. The collections of his short stories

include The Adventures of Sherlock Holmesand The Return of Sherlock Holmes. The stories are full ofsuspense, excitement and humour. At the same time, they

develop a structure of keen, analytical intelligence, with adeep human appeal.
54Woven Words
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.What clues did Sherlock Holmes work upon to get at the fact
that the story of the three Garridebs was a ruse?2.What was John Garrideb™s objective in inventing the story of
Alexander Hamilton Garrideb and his legacy?3.Why didn™t John Garrideb like the idea of including Holmes in
the hunt for the third Garrideb?4.Who was Roger Presbury and how was John Garrideb connected
with him?5.How did Holmes guess that John Garrideb would go to 136,
Little Ryder Street? Did he expect to find what he ultimately did
before he went there?TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss the following in pairs or in small groups1.‚It was worth a woundŠit was worth many woundsŠto know
the depth of loyalty and love that lay behind that cold mask™Šhow does this comment throw light on the kind of relationship
between Holmes and Watson?
2.The cleverest of criminals leave behind clues to their crime.
3.How did Holmes™ digressions sometimes prove in the end to have
a bearing on the matter on hand? Discuss this with referenceto all the apparently irrelevant points he was trying to gather
information from.APPRECIATION1.Examine the structure of the short story ‚Adventure of the Three
Garridebs™ with the help of this frameworkThe narrator of the storyIntroduction of the topic of the storyIntroduction of the main characters in the plotDevelopment of the plotClimaxResolution of the mystery.2.Examine the subtle humour in the narration of the story that
lightens the gravity of the subject matter.

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs55LANGUAGE WORK1.a.Identify the words in the advertisement that gave away the
fact that it was placed by John Garrideb.b.Make a list of words which are spelt differently in Americanand British English.2.Look at the highlighted expressions in the following sentences
from the text and explain their figurative meaning‚I went through it, sir,
 with a fine-toothed comb and nevera Garrideb could I catch.™‚They are my favourite covert for putting up a bird, and Iwould never have overlooked a cock pheasant as that.™‚There is no bolt-hole for you in this country.™‚When his castle in the air fell down, it buried him beneaththe ruins.™SUGGESTED READING1.The Case-book of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle2.The Valley of Fear
 by Arthur Conan Doyle3.Tales of Adventure and Medical Life by Arthur Conan Doyle.
