Let Me Not to the Marriage of True Minds
109Let Me Not to theMarriage of True Minds
William ShakespeareLet me not to the marriage of true mindsAdmit impediments. Love is not loveWhich alters when it alteration finds,Or bends with the remover to remove.O no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;It is the star to every wandering bark,Whose worth™s unknown, although his height be taken.Love™s not Time™s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle™s compass come;Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,But bears it out even to the edge of doom.If this be error, and upon me proved,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.ABOUT THE POET William Shakespeare (1564Œ1616) was one of thegreatest poets and dramatists of the Englishlanguage. Born at Stratford-on-Avon, England,
he went to London where his reputation as a
dramatist and poet was established. His Sonnets,154 in number, probably written between 1593 and 1598,
were  published in 1602. The above sonnet is sonnet number
116 in which we have a depiction of true love. His voluminouswork includes 37 plays and two narrative poems.2
110Woven Words
The following two common words are used in a different sense inthe poem. Guess what they meanbarkcompassUNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.‚Constancy™ is the theme of the poem. Indicate the words,
phrases and images that suggest the theme.2.Why do you think the poet has used so many ‚negatives™ to make
his statement?3.What does the line ‚I never writ, nor no man ever loved™ imply?
4.Love is presented as the subject or doer of actions in the poem.
Why do you think the poet has used this form rather thaninvolving human agents?5.Explain the phrases
a.his bending sickle™s compass
b.Time™s fool
TRY THIS OUT This poem is a Shakespearean sonnet.1.What do you understand by a sonnet?
2.Look at some other sonnets and notice the variations in the
structure of the sonnet that are possible.SUGGESTED READING 1.ﬁShall I Compare Thee™
 by William Shakespeare.
