10Woven Words
A Pair of MustachiosMulk Raj AnandGuess the meaning of these expressions from the contextnouveau richecommercial bourgeoiseblue bloodthe bluff of a rascal
asked sourlygoods and chattels
There are various kinds of mustachios worn in my countryto mark the boundaries between the various classes ofpeople. Outsiders may think it stupid to lay down, or ratherto raise, lines of demarcation of this kind, but we arenotorious in the whole world for sticking to our queer oldconventions, prides and prejudices, even as the Chinese orthe Americans or, for that matter, 
the English– And, atany rate, some people may think it easier and moreconvenient to wear permanent boundary-lines, likemustachios, which only need a smear of grease to keep
them bright and shiny, rather than to wear frock coats,striped trousers and top hats, which constantly need to belaundered and dry-cleaned, and the maintenance of which
is already leading to the bankruptcy of the European rulingclasses. With them clothes make the man but, to us,mustachios make the man. So we prefer the various styles
of mustachios to mark the differences between the classes.And very unique and poetical symbols they are too.For instance, there is the famous lion moustache, the
fearsome upstanding symbol of that great order ofresplendent rajas, maharajas, nawabs and English armygenerals who are so well known for their devotion to the
King Emperor. Then there is the tiger moustache, the
uncanny, several-pointed moustache worn by theunbending, unchanging survivals from the ranks of the2
A Pair of Mustachios11feudal gentry who have nothing left but pride in theirgreatness and a few mementoes of past glory, scrolls of
honour granted by the former emperors, a few gold trinkets,heirlooms and bits of land. Next there is the goatmoustacheŠa rather unsure brand, worn by the nouveau
riche, the new commercial bourgeoisie and the shopkeeperclass who somehow don™t belongŠan indifferent, thin littleline of a moustache, worn so that its tips can be turned upor down as the occasion demandsŠa show of power to somecoolie or humility to a prosperous client. There is the CharlieChaplin moustache worn by the lower middle class, by
clerks and professional men, a kind of half-and-half affair,
deliberately designed as a compromise between thetraditional full moustache and the clean-shaven Curzoncut of the sahibs like them to keep mustachios at all. Thereis the sheep moustache of the coolies and the lower orders,the mouse moustache of the peasants, and so on.In fact, there are endless styles of mustachios, allappropriate to the wearers and indicative of the various
orders, as rigorously adhered to as if they had all beenpatented by the Government of India or had been sanctionedby special appointment with His Majesty, the King, or Her
Majesty, the Queen. And any poaching on the style of oneclass by members of another is resented, and the risingratio of murders in my country is interpreted by certain
authorities as being indicative of the increasing jealousywith which each class is guarding its rights and privilegesin regard to the mark of the mustachio.Of course, the analysis of the expert is rather tooabstract and not all the murders can be traced to this
cause but, certainly, it is true that the preferences of the
people in regard to their mustachios are causing a lot oftrouble in our parts.For instance, there was a rumpus in my own villagethe other day about a pair of mustachios.It so happened that Seth Ramanand, the grocer andmoneylender, who had been doing well out of the recent
fall in the price of wheat by buying up whole crops cheapfrom the hard-pressed peasants and then selling them athigher prices, took it into his head to twist the goat
12Woven Words
moustache, integral to his order and position in society, atthe tips, so that it looked nearly like a tiger moustache.Nobody seemed to mind very much because most ofthe mouse-moustached peasants in our village are beholdento the local moneylender, either because they owe him

interest on a loan, or an instalment on a mortgage ofjewellery or land. Besides, the Seth had been careful enoughto twist his moustache so that it seemed nearly, thoughnot quite, like a tiger moustache.But there lives in the vicinity of our village, in an olddilapidated Moghul style house, a mussulman named KhanAzam Khan, who claims descent from an ancient Afghanfamily whose heads were noblemen and councillors in thecourt of the great Moghuls. Khan Azam Khan, a tall, middle-aged man, is a handsome and dignified person, and hewears a tiger moustache and remains adorned with thefaded remnants of a gold-brocaded waistcoat, though he
hasn™t even a patch of land left.Some people, notably the landlord of our village andthe moneylender, maliciously say that he is an impostor,
and that all his talk about his blue blood is merely thebluff of a rascal. Others, like the priest of the temple,
concede that his ancestors were certainly attached to theCourt of the Great Moghuls, but as sweepers. The landlord,the moneylender and the priest are manifestly jealous of
anyone™s long ancestry, however, because they have all risen
from nothingŠand it is obvious from the stately ruinsaround Khan Azam Khan what grace was once his and hisforefathers. Only Khan Azam Khan™s pride is greatly inexcess of his present possessions and he is inordinatelyjealous of his old privileges and rather foolish and
headstrong in safeguarding every sacred brick of histottering house against vandalism.Khan Azam Khan happened to go to the moneylender™sshop to pawn his wife™s gold nose-ring one morning and he
noticed the upturning tendency of the hair on Ramanand™supper lip which made the moneylender™s goat moustache
look almost like his own tiger moustache.‚Since when have the lentil-eating shopkeepers becomenoblemen?™ he asked sourly.
A Pair of Mustachios13‚I don™t know what you mean, Khan™, Ramanandanswered.‚You know  what I mean, seed of a donkey!™ said the
Khan. Look at the way you have turned the tips of yourmoustache upwards. It almost looks like my tiger
moustache. Turn the tips down to the style proper to thegoat that you are! Fancy the airs of people nowadays!™‚Oh, Khan, don™t get so excited,™ said the moneylender,
who was nothing if he was not amenable, having built up
his business on the maxim that the customer is alwaysright.‚I tell you, turn the tip of your moustache down if youvalue your life!™ raged Khan Azam Khan.‚If that is all the trouble, here you are™, said Ramanand,brushing one end of his moustache with his oily hand sothat it dropped like a dead fly. ‚Come, show me the trinkets.
How much do you want for them?™Now that Khan Azam Khan™s pride was appeased, hewas like soft wax in the merchant™s sure hand. His need,
and the need of his family, for food, was great and he humblyaccepted the value which the moneylender put on his wife™snose-ring.But as he was departing, after negotiating his business,he noticed that though one end of the moneylender™s moustache
had come down at his behest, the other end was still up.
14Woven Words
‚A strange trick you have played on me, you swine,™ theKhan said.‚I have paid you the best value for your trinket, Khan,that any moneylender will pay in these parts,™ he said,‚especially in these days when the sarkars of the whole
world are threatening to go off the gold standard.™‚It has nothing to do with the trinket,™ said Azam Khan,‚but one end of your moustache is still up like my tiger
moustache though you have brought down the other toyour proper goat™s style. Bring that other end down also sothat there is no aping by your moustache of mine.™‚Now Khan,™ said the moneylender, ‚I humbled myself
because you are doing business with me. You can™t expect

me to become a mere worm just because you have pawneda trinket with me. If you were pledging some more expensivejewellery I might consider obliging you a little more. Anyhow,my humble milk-skimmer doesn™t look a bit like your valiant
tiger moustache.™‚Bring that tip down!™ Khan Azam Khan roared, for, the
more he had looked at the moneylender™s moustache themore the still upturned tip seemed to him like an effort atan imitation of his own.‚Now, be sensible, Khan,™ the moneylender said, wavinghis hand with an imperturbable calm.‚I tell you, turn that tip down or I shall wring yourneck,™ said the Khan.‚All right, the next time you come to do business withme, I shall bring that tip down,™ answered the moneylendercunningly.‚That is fair,™ said Chaudhary Chottu Ram, the landlord
of the village, who was sitting under the tree opposite.‚To be sure! To be sure!™ some peasants chimed insheepishly.Khan Azam Khan managed to control his murderousimpulses and walked away. But he could not quell hispride, the pride of generations of his ancestors who hadworn the tiger moustache as a mark of their high position.
To see the symbol of his honour imitated by amoneylenderŠthis was too much for him. He went homeand fetched a necklace which had come down to his family
A Pair of Mustachios15through seven generations and, placing it before themoneylender, said:
‚Now will you bring that tip of your moustache down?™‚By all means, Khan,™ said the moneylender. ‚But let
us see about this necklace. How much do you want for it?™‚Any price will do, so long as you bring the tip of yourmoustache down,™ answered Azam Khan.After they had settled the business, the moneylendersaid: ‚Now Khan, I shall carry out your will.™ And heceremoniously brushed the upturned tip of his moustachedown.As Azam Khan was walking away, however, he noticed
that the other tip of the moneylender™s moustache had now
gone up and stood dubiously like the upturned end of hisown exalted tiger moustache. He turned on his feet andshouted:‚I shall kill you if you don™t brush that moustache intothe shape appropriate to your position as a lentil-eating
moneylender!™‚Now, now, Khan, come to your senses. You know it is
only the illusion of a tiger™s moustache and nowhere likeyour brave and wonderful adornment,™ said the greasy
moneylender.
‚I tell you I won™t have you insulting the insignia of myorder!™ shouted Azam Khan. ‚You bring that tip down!™
‚I wouldn™t do it, Khan, even if you pawned all thejewellery you possess to me,™ said the moneylender.
‚I would rather lose all my remaining worldlypossessions, my pots and pans, my clothes, even my house,than see the tip of your moustache turned up like that!™spluttered Azam Khan.‚Achcha, if you care so little for all your goods andchattels you sell them to me and then I shall turn that tip
of my moustache down,™ said the moneylender. ‚And what

is more, I shall keep it flat. Now, is that a bargain?™‚That seems fair enough,™ said the landlord from underthe tree where he was preparing for a siesta.‚But what proof have I that you will keep your word?™said Azam Khan. ‚You oily lentil-eaters never keep your

promises.™
16Woven Words
‚We shall draw up a deed, here and now,™ said the
moneylender. ‚And we shall have it signed by the five elders
of the village who are seated under that tree. What moredo you want?™‚Now, there is no catch in that,™ put in the landlord. ‚Iand four other elders will come to court as witnesses onyour behalf if he doesn™t keep his moustache to the goatstyle ever afterwards.™‚I shall excommunicate him from religion if he doesn™tkeep his word,™ added the priest, who had arrived on thescene on hearing the hubbub.‚Achcha,™ agreed Azam Khan.And he forthwith had a deed prepared by the petitionwriter of the village, who sat smoking his hubble-bubbleunder the tree. And this document, transferring all hishousehold goods and chattels, was signed in the presence ofthe five elders of the village and sealed. And the moneylender
forthwith brought both tips of his moustache down and keptthem glued in the goat style appropriate to his order.
Only, as soon as Khan Azam Khan™s back was turnedhe muttered to the peasants seated nearby: ‚My father wasa Sultan.™And they laughed to see the Khan give a special twistto his moustache as he walked away maintaining the valiant
uprightness to the symbol of his ancient and noble family,
though he had become a pauper.
ABOUT THE AUTHORMulk Raj Anand (1905Œ2003), one of themost celebrated Indian novelists who wrotein English, was born in Peshawar and
educated at the universities of Lahore,
London and Cambridge.His novels include The Untouchable,Coolie, The Sword and the Sickle, Private Lifeof an Indian Prince, Seven Summers andMorning Face. He also published a number of short storieswhich reveal a lively sense of humour, a keen eye for the
pretensions of the people and a feeling of warm compassion.
A Pair of Mustachios17UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.What do you understand of the natures of Ramanand and Azam
Khan from the episode described?2.Identify instances in the story that show the business acumen
of Ramanand.3.Both Ramanand and Azam Khan seem to have very fixed views.
How does Ramanand  score over Azam Khan towards the end ofthe story?TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss the following in groups of three or four1.The episode has been narrated in a light vein. What social mores
does the author seem to ridicule?2.What do you think are the reasons for the references made to
the English people and the British monarchy?3.What do you think is the message that the author seems to
convey through the story?
Compare your group™s views with that of the other groups.APPRECIATION1.Comment on the way in which the theme of the story has been
introduced.2.How does the insertion of dialogue in the story contribute to its
interest?LANGUAGE WORK1.Nouveau riche and bourgeoise are French words. Collect fromnewspapers, magazines and other sources some more Frenchwords or expressions that are commonly used in English.2.Locate expressions in the text which reflect the Indian idiom,
for example, the pride of the generations of his ancestors.3.We ‚draw up a deed™. Complete the following phrases with
appropriate wordsa.   ––––.. one™s word                  b.  –––––.. one™s will
c.  ––––– ends meet                  d.   –––––.. a loan
e.  –––––.a deaf ear to
18Woven Words
SUGGESTED READING1.The Barber™s Trade Union and Other Stories 
by Mulk Raj Anand.Read and EnjoyMAY THE BEST BEARD WINHANDLEBAR HEROES: There were men with Fu Manchumoustaches and contestants with long flowing Gandalfbeards.Some 220 contestants from all over the world have gatheredin Berlin for Saturday™s biannual world beard and
moustache championships.THE WACKIER THE BETTER: 
German Elmar Weisser
supports a Brandenburg Gate on his chin. CountrymanJuergen Reinl™s spikes give porcupines a complex. And,
finally, grandpa Willi Chevalier is in a class of his own.BUT BEAT THIS SANTA : 
Entrants in the freestyle sectionturned up with Christmas tree beards.
From the 
Hindustan Times
, 2-10-05.
