For Elkana123
124Woven Words
8For ElkanaNissim EzekielThe warm April eveningtempts us to the breezessauntering across the lawn.We drag our chairs down
the stone steps and plant them there.Unevenly, to sit or rather sprawlin silence till the words begin to come.My wife, as is her way,surveys the scene, commentson a broken window-pane.Suggests a thing or twothat every husband in the neighbourhoodknows exactly how to doexcept of course the man she loveswho happened to be me.Unwilling to disputethe obvious fact
For Elkana125that she is always right,I turn towards the moreattractive view that opens upbehind my eyes and shuts her out.Her voice crawls up and down the lawn,our son, who is seven,hears itŠand it reminds him of something.He stands before us,his small legs well apart,crescent-moon-like chin upliftedeyes hard and coldto speak his truthin masterly determination:Mummy, I want my dinner, now.
Wife and husband in unusual rapportstate one unspoken thought:Children Must be Disciplined.She looks at me. I look away.The son is waiting. In another secondhe will repeat himself.Wife wags a finger.
Firmly delivers verdict: Wait.
In five minutes I™ll serve you dinner.
No, says the little one,not in five minutes, now.I am hungry.It occurs to me the boy is like his father.
I love him as I love myself.Wait, darling, wait,
Mummy says, wait for five minutesBut, I am hungry now,declaims the little bastard, in five minutesI won™t be hungry any more.This argument appeals to me.Such a logician deserves his dinner straightaway.
126Woven Words
My wife™s delightful laughterholds the three of us together.
We rise and go into the house.
ABOUT THE POET Nissim Ezekiel (1924Œ2004) was born in Mumbai.He is today perhaps the best known Indian poet
to have written in English. He had his educationat Wilson College, Bombay and later at BirbeckCollege, London. A professor of American Literature at
Bombay University, Ezekiel has written several poems andsome plays. A proficient critic, Ezekiel lectured at a numberof universities in the U.S.A. and the U.K.UNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.Comment on the subtlety with which the poet captures the
general pattern of communication within a family.2.Poetic effect is achieved in the poem through understatement
and asides. Discuss this with examples.3.How is the idyllic juxtaposed with the pedestrian in the poem?
4.Explain the undertones in the statement:
‚Wife and husband in unusual rapportState one unspoken thought™:5.Comment on the capitalisation of all the words in the line:
‚Children Must be Disciplined™.6.What makes the urgency of the child™s demand seem logical?
TRY THIS OUT1.Paraphrase the poem and notice the change in effect. Comment
on the deft touch with which the poet transforms ordinary eventsinto evocative poetry.SUGGESTED READING The Night of the Scorpion and Other Poems by Nissim Ezekiel.
For Elkana127The LimerickThe limerick is a small five line poem, expressing a singlethought. It is usually funny with a punch or joke in thelast line. In fact, the limerick is to poetry what slapstick isto comedy.The rhyme scheme is ‚a a b b a™ : the first and secondlines rhyme with the fifth, while the third and fourth linesrhyme with each other.
One reason why the limerick is popular is that almostanyone can try his/her hand at it. May be you could too!***A novice was driving a carWhen, down the road, his son said ﬁPapa,
If you drive at this rateWe are bound to be lateŠ
Drive faster!ﬂ He did, and they are.***
