62Woven Words
The Third and Final ContinentJhumpa LahiriGuess what these words and phrases mean from the contextLSEGrundig reel-to-reel
holleredheraldedclamorousstucco
forsythia bushesruffleschappedfoyermortified
I left India in 1964 with a certificate in commerce and theequivalent, in those days, of ten dollars to my name. Forthree weeks I sailed on the SS Roma, an Italian cargo vessel,in a third-class cabin next to the ship™s engine, across theArabian Sea, the Red Sea, the Mediterranean and, finally,
to England. I lived in north London, in Finsbury Park, in ahouse occupied entirely by penniless Bengali bachelors likemyself, at least a dozen and sometimes more, all strugglingto educate and establish ourselves abroad.I attended lectures at the LSE and worked at theuniversity library to get by. We lived three or four to a

room, shared a single, icy toilet, and took turns cookingpots of egg curry, which we ate with our hands on a tablecovered with newspapers. Apart from our jobs we had few
responsibilities. On weekends we lounged barefoot indrawstring pyjamas, drinking tea and smoking Rothmans,or set out to watch cricket at Lord™s. Some weekends the
house was crammed with still more Bengalis to whom wehad introduced ourselves at the greengrocer or on the Tube,and we made yet more egg curry, and played Mukesh on a
Grundig reel-to-reel, and soaked our dirty dishes in thebathtub. Every now and then someone in the house movedout to live with a woman whom his family back in Calcutta
had determined he was to wed. In 1969, when I was thirty-6
The Third and Final Continent63six years old, my own marriage was arranged. Around thesame time, I was offered a full-time job in America, in the
processing department of a library at MIT. The salary wasgenerous enough to support a wife, and I was honoured tobe  hired by a world-famous university, and so I obtained a
sixth-preference green card and prepared to travel fartherstill.By now I had enough money to go by plane. I flew firstto Calcutta, to attend my wedding, and a week later I flew
first to Boston, to begin my new job. During the flight Iread The Student Guide to North America, a paperback volumethat I™d bought before leaving London, for seven shillingssix pence on Tottenham Court Road for, although I was no
longer a student, I was on a budget all the same. I learnedthat Americans drove on the right side of the road, not theleft, and that they called a lift an elevator and an engagedphone busy. ‚The pace of life in North America is different
from Britain as you will soon discover,™ the guidebook
informed me. ‚Everybody feels he must get to the top. Don™texpect an English cup of tea.™ As the plane began its descentover Boston Harbour, the pilot announced the weather and
time, and that President Nixon had declared a national
holiday: two American men had landed on the moon.Several passengers cheered. ‚God bless America!™ one ofthem hollered. Across the aisle, I saw a woman praying.I spent my first night at the YMCA in Central Square,Cambridge, an  inexpensive accommodation recommended
by my guidebook. It was walking distance from MIT, andsteps away from the post office and a supermarket calledPurity Supreme. The room contained a cot, a desk and asmall wooden cross on one wall. A sign on the door said
cooking was strictly forbidden. A bare window overlookedMassachusetts Avenue, a major thoroughfare with trafficin both directions. Car horns, shrill and prolonged, blared
one after another. Flashing sirens heralded endless
emergencies and a fleet of buses rumbled past, their doorsopening and closing with a powerful hiss, throughout the
night. The noise was constantly distracting, at timessuffocating. I felt it deep in my ribs, just as I had felt thefurious drone of the engine on the SS Roma. But there was
64Woven Words
no ship™s deck to escape to, no glittering ocean to thrill mysoul, no breeze to cool my face, no one to talk to. I was too
tired to pace the gloomy corridors of the YMCA in mydrawstring pyjamas. Instead I sat at the desk and staredout the window, at the city hall of Cambridge and a row of
small shops. In the morning I reported to my job at theDewey Library, a beige fortlike building by Memorial Drive.I also opened a bank account, rented a post office box, andbought a plastic bowl and a spoon at Woolworth™s, a store
whose name I recognised  from London. I went to PuritySupreme, wandering up and down the aisles, converting
ounces to grams and comparing prices to things in England.In the end I bought a small carton of milk and a box ofcornflakes. This was my first meal in America. I ate it atmy desk. I preferred it to hamburgers or hot dogs, the onlyalternative I could afford in the coffee shops onMassachusetts Avenue, and, besides, at the time I had yet
to consume any beef. Even the simple chore of buying milkwas new to me; in London we™d had bottles delivered eachmorning to our door.
In a week I had adjusted, more or less. I ate cornflakesand milk, morning and night, and bought some bananas
for variety, slicing them into the bowl with the edge of myspoon. In addition I bought tea bags and a flask, which thesalesman in Woolworth™s referred to as a thermos (a flask,

he informed me, was used to store whiskey, another thingI had never consumed). For the price of one cup of tea at acoffee shop, I filled the flask with boiling water on my wayto work each morning, and brewed the four cups I drank inthe course of a day. I bought a larger carton of milk, andlearned to leave it on the shaded part of the windowsill, as
I had seen another resident at the YMCA do. To pass thetime in the evenings I read the Boston Globe downstairs, ina spacious room with stained glass windows. I read everyarticle and advertisement so that I would grow familiarwith things and, when my eyes grew tired, I slept. Only Idid not sleep well. Each night I had to keep the window
wide open; it was the only source of air in the stifling room,and the noise was intolerable. I would lie on the cot withmy fingers pressed into my ears but when I drifted off to
The Third and Final Continent65sleep, my hands fell away and the noise of the traffic wouldwake me up again. Pigeon feathers drifted onto the window-
sill and, one evening, when I poured milk over mycornflakes, I saw that it had soured. Nevertheless I resolvedto stay at the YMCA for six weeks, until my wife™s passport
and green card were ready. Once she arrived I would haveto rent a proper apartment and so, from time to time, Istudied the classified section of the newspaper, or stopped
in at the housing office at MIT during my lunch-break, tosee what was available in my price range. It was in thismanner that I discovered a room, for immediate occupancy,
in a house on a quiet street, the listing said, for eightdollars per week. I copied the number into my guidebookand dialled from a pay telephone, sorting through the coinswith which I was still unfamiliar, smaller and lighter than
shillings, heavier and brighter than paisas.‚Who is speaking?™ a woman demanded. Her voice wasbold and clamorous.‚Yes, good afternoon, madame. I am calling about the
room, for rent.™‚Harvard or Tech?™‚I beg your pardon?™
‚Are you from Harvard or Tech?™Gathering that Tech referred to the MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, I replied, ‚I work at Dewey Library™,adding tentatively, ‚at Tech™.I was given an address and an appointment for seveno™clock that evening. Thirty minutes before the hour I setout, my guidebook in my pocket, my breath fresh withListerine. I turned down a street shaded with trees,perpendicular to Massachusetts Avenue. Stray blades of
grass poked between the cracks of the footpath. In spite ofthe heat I wore a coat and a tie, regarding the event as Iwould any other interview; I had never lived in the home of
a person who was not Indian. The house, surrounded by achain-link fence, was off-white with dark brown trim.Unlike the stucco row house I™d lived in, in London, this
house, fully detached, was covered with wooded shingles,with a tangle of forsythia bushes plastered against thefront and sides. When I pressed the calling bell, the woman
66Woven Words
with whom I had spoken on the phone hollered from whatseemed to be just the other side of the door, ‚One minute

please!™Several minutes later the door was opened by a tiny,extremely old woman. A mass of snowy hair was arrangedlike a small sack on top of her head. As I stepped into thehouse, she sat down on a wooden bench positioned at thebottom of a narrow carpeted staircase. Once she was settledon the bench, in a small pool of light, she peered up at mewith undivided attention. She wore a long black skirt thatspread like a stiff tent to the floor, and a starched white

shirt edged with ruffles at the throat and cuffs. Her hands,folded together in her lap, had long pallid fingers, withswollen knuckles and tough yellow nails. Age had batteredher features so that she almost resembled a man, withsharp, shrunken eyes and prominent creases on either sideof her nose. Her lips, chapped and faded, had nearly
disappeared, and her eyebrows were missing altogether.
Nevertheless she looked fierce.‚Look up!™ she commanded. She shouted even though Istood only a few feet away. ‚Fasten the chain and firmlypress that button on the knob! This is the first thing you
shall do when you enter, is that clear?™
I locked the door as directed and examined the house.Next to the bench on which the woman sat was a small
round table, its legs fully concealed, much like the woman™s,by a skirt of lace. The table held a lamp, a transistor radio,a leather change purse with a silver clasp and a telephone.A thick wooden cane coated with a layer of dust was proppedagainst one side. There was a parlour to my right, linedwith bookcases and filled with shabby claw-footed furniture.
In the corner of the parlour I saw a grand piano with itstop down, piled with papers. The piano™s bench was missing;it seemed to be the one on which the woman was sitting.
Somewhere in the house a clock chimed seven times.‚You™re punctual!™ the woman proclaimed. ‚ I expect you
shall be so with the rent!™‚I have a letter, madame.™ In my jacket pocket was a
letter confirming my employment from MIT, which I had
brought along to prove that I was indeed from Tech.
The Third and Final Continent67She stared at the letter, then handed it back to me
carefully, gripping it with her fingers as if it were a dinnerplate heaped with food instead of a sheet of paper. She did
not wear glasses and I wondered if she™d read a word of it.‚The last boy was always late! Still owes me eight dollars!
Harvard boys aren™t what they used to be! Only Harvardand Tech in this house! How™s Tech, boy?™‚It is very well.™‚You checked the lock?™
‚Yes, madame.™
She slapped the space beside her on the bench withone hand and told me to sit down. For a moment she wassilent. Then she intoned, as if she alone possessed thisknowledge:‚There is an American flag on the moon!™‚Yes, madame.™ Until then I had not thought very much
about the moon shot. It was in the newspaper, of course,
article upon article. The astronauts had landed on theshores of the Sea of Tranquillity, I had read, travelling
farther than anyone in the history of civilization. For a fewhours they explored the moon™s surface. They gathered rocksin their pockets, described their surroundings (a
magnificent desolation, according to one astronaut), spokeby phone to the President and planted a flag in lunar soil.The voyage was hailed as man™s most awesome achievement.
I had seen full-page photographs in the Globe, of theastronauts in their inflated costumes, and read about what
certain people in Boston had been doing at the exact momentthe astronauts landed, on a Sunday afternoon. A man saidthat he was operating a swan boat with a radio pressed tohis ear; a woman had been baking rolls for her
grandchildren.The woman bellowed, ‚A flag on the moon, boy! I heardit on the radio! Isn™t that splendid?™‚Yes, madame.™
But she was not satisfied with my reply. Instead shecommanded, ‚Say ‚splendid™!™I was both baffled and somewhat insulted by therequest. It reminded me of the way I was taughtmultiplication tables as a child, repeating after the master,

68Woven Words
sitting cross-legged, without shoes or pencils, on the floorof my one-room Tollygunge school. It also reminded me of
my wedding when I had repeated endless Sanskrit versesafter the priest, verses I barely understood, which joinedme to my wife. I said nothing.‚Say ‚splendid™!™ the woman bellowed once again.‚Splendid,™ I murmured. I had to repeat the word asecond time at the top of my lungs so she could hear. I am
soft-spoken by nature and was especially reluctant to raisemy voice to an elderly woman whom I had met only momentsago, but she did not appear to be offended. If anything the
reply pleased her because her next command was:‚Go see the room!™
I rose from the bench and mounted the narrow carpetedstaircase. There were five doors, two on either side of anequally narrow hallway and one at the opposite end. Onlyone door was partly open. The room contained a twin bed
under a sloping ceiling, a brown oval rug, a basin with anexposed pipe, and a chest of drawers. One door, painted
white, led to a closet, another to a toilet and a tub. Thewalls were covered with gray and ivory striped paper. The
window was open; net curtains stirred in the breeze. I lifted
them away and inspected the view: a small backyard, witha few fruit trees and an empty clothesline. I was satisfied.From the bottom of the stairs I heard the woman demand,
‚What is your decision?™When I returned to the foyer and told her, she picked
up the leather change purse on the table, opened the clasp,fished about with her fingers, and produced a key on athin wire hoop. She informed me that there was a kitchenat the back of the house, accessible through the parlour. I

was welcome to use the stove as long as I left it as I foundit. Sheets and towels were provided but keeping them cleanwas my own responsibility. The rent was due Friday
mornings on the ledge above the piano keys. ‚And no ladyvisitors!™‚I am a married man, madame.™ It was the first time Ihad announced this fact to anyone.But she had not heard. ‚No lady visitors!™ she insisted.She introduced herself as Mrs Croft.
The Third and Final Continent69My wife™s name was Mala. The marriage had beenarranged by my older brother and his wife. I regarded theproposition with neither objection nor enthusiasm. It wasa duty expected of me as it was expected of every man. Shewas the daughter of a school teacher in Beleghata. I was
told that she could cook, knot, embroider, sketch landscapes
and recite poems by Tagore, but these talents could notmake up for the fact that she did not possess a faircomplexion and so a string of men had rejected her to herface. She was twenty-seven, an age when her parents hadbegun to fear that she would never marry, and so they
were willing to ship their only child halfway across theworld in order to save her from spinsterhood.For five nights we shared a bed. Each of those nights,after applying cold cream and braiding her hair, which she

tied up at the end with a black cotton string, she turnedfrom me and wept; she missed her parents. Although I
would be leaving the country in a few days, custom dictatedthat she was now a part of my household, and for the nextsix weeks she was to live with my brother and his wife,cooking, cleaning, serving tea and sweets to guests. I didnothing to console her. I lay on my own side of the bed,

reading my guidebook by flashlight and anticipating myjourney. At times I thought of the tiny room on the otherside of the wall which had belonged to my mother. Now the

room was practically empty; the wooden pallet on whichshe™d once slept was piled with trunks and old bedding.Nearly six years ago, before leaving for London, I had watchedher die on that bed, had found her playing with herexcrement in her final days. Before we cremated her I hadcleaned each of her fingernails with a hairpin and then,
because my brother could not bear it, I had assumed therole of eldest son, and had touched the flame to her temple,to release her tormented soul to heaven.The next morning I moved into the room in Mrs Croft™shouse. When I unlocked the door, I saw that she was sitting

on the piano bench, on the same side as the previous
evening. She wore the same black skirt, the same starchedwhite blouse and had her hands folded together the sameway in her lap. She looked so much the same that I wondered
70Woven Words
if she™d spent the whole night on the bench. I put my suitcaseupstairs, filled my flask with boiling water in the kitchen,
and headed off to work. That evening when I came homefrom the university, she was still there.‚Sit down, boy!™ She slapped the space beside her.
I perched beside her on the bench. I had a bag ofgroceries with meŠmore milk, more cornflakes and morebananas, for, my inspection of the kitchen earlier in the
day had revealed no spare pots, pans, or cooking utensils.There were only two saucepans in the refrigerator, both
containing some orange broth, and a copper kettle on the
stove.‚Good evening, madame.™
She asked me if I had checked the lock. I told her Ihad.For a moment she was silent. Then suddenly shedeclared, with equal measures of disbelief and delight asthe night before, ‚There™s an American flag on the moon,boy!™‚Yes, madame.™

‚A flag on the moon! Isn™t that splendid?™I nodded, dreading what I knew was coming. ‚Yes,
madame.™‚Say ‚splendid™!™
This time I paused, looking to either side in case anyonewere there to overhear me, though I knew perfectly wellthat the house was empty. I felt like an idiot. But is was asmall enough thing to ask. ‚splendid!™ I cried out.Within days it became our routine. In the mornings,when I left for the library, Mrs Croft was either hidden
away in her bedroom, on the other side of the staircase, or
she was sitting on the bench, oblivious to my presence,listening to the news or classical music on the radio. Buteach evening when I returned the same thing happened:
she slapped the bench, ordered me to sit down, declaredthat there was a flag on the moon, and declared that it wassplendid. I said it was splendid, too, and then we sat in
silence. As awkward as it was, and as endless as it felt tome then, the nightly encounter lasted only about tenminutes; inevitably she would drift off to sleep, her head
The Third and Final Continent71falling abruptly toward her chest, leaving me free to retireto my room. By then, of course, there was no flag on the
moon. The astronauts, I had read in the paper, had taken
it down before flying back to earth. But I did not have theheart to tell her.
Friday morning, when my first week™s rent was due, Iwent to the piano in the parlour to place my money on theledge. The piano keys were dull and discoloured. When Ipressed one, it made no sound at all. I had put eight one-dollar bills in an envelope and written Mrs Croft™s name onthe front of it; I was not in the habit of leaving money
unmarked and unattended. From where I stood I could seethe profile of her tent-shaped skirt. She was sitting on thebench, listening to the radio. It seemed unnecessary tomake her get up and walk all the way to the piano. I neversaw her walking about and assumed, from the cane alwayspropped against the round table at her side, that she did
so with difficulty. When I approached the bench, she peeredup at me and demanded:‚What is your business?™
‚The rent, madame.™‚On the ledge above the piano keys!™
‚I have it here.™ I extended the envelope toward her, but
her fingers, folded together in her lap, did not budge. I
bowed slightly and lowered the envelope, so that it hovered
just above her hands. After a moment she accepted, andnodded her head.That night when I came home, she did not slap thebench but out of habit I sat beside her as usual. She askedme if I had checked the lock but she mentioned nothingabout the flag on the moon. Instead she said:‚It was very kind of you!™‚I beg your pardon, madame?™‚Very kind of you!™

She was still holding the envelope in her hands.On Sunday there was a knock on my door. An elderly
woman introduced herself: she was Mrs Croft™s daughter,
Helen. She walked into the room and looked at each of thewalls as if for signs of change, glancing at the shirts thathung in the closet, the neckties draped over the doorknob,
72Woven Words
the box of cornflakes on the chest of drawers, the dirtybowl and spoon in the basin. She was short and thick-
waisted, with cropped silver hair and bright pink lipstick.She wore a sleeveless summer dress, a row of white plasticbeads and spectacles on a chain that hung like a swing
against her chest. The backs of her legs were mapped withdark blue veins and her upper arms sagged like the fleshof a roasted eggplant. She told me she lived in Arlington, atown farther up Massachusetts Avenue. ‚I come once a weekto bring Mother groceries. Has she sent you packing yet?™‚It is very well, madame.™‚Some of the boys run screaming. But I think she likesyou. You™re the first boarder she™s ever referred to as a

gentleman.™‚Not at all, madame.™She looked at me, noticing my bare feet (I still feltstrange wearing shoes indoors, and always removed thembefore entering my room). ‚Are you new to Boston?™‚New to America, madame.™
‚From?™ She raised her eyebrows.‚I am from Calcutta, India.™‚Is that right? We had a Brazilian fellow, about a year
ago. You™ll find Cambridge a very international city.™
I nodded, and began to wonder how long ourconversation would last. But at that moment we heard
Mrs Croft™s electrifying voice rising up the stairs. When westepped into the hallway we heard her hollering:‚You are to come downstairs immediately!™
‚What is it?™ Helen hollered back.‚Immediately!™I put on my shoes at once. Helen sighed.
We walked down the staircase. It was too narrow for
us to descend side by side, so I followed Helen, who seemed
to be in no hurry, and complained at one point that she
had a bad knee. ‚Have you been walking without your cane?™Helen called out. ‚You know you™re not supposed to walk
without that cane.™ She paused, resting her hand on the
banister, and looked back at me. ‚She slips sometimes.™
For the first time Mrs Croft seemed vulnerable. Ipictured her on the floor in front of the bench, flat on her
The Third and Final Continent73back, staring at the ceiling, her feet pointing in oppositedirections. But when we reached the bottom of the staircase
she was sitting there as usual, her hands folded togetherin her lap. Two grocery bags were at her feet. When westood before her she did not slap the bench, or ask us to sit
down. She glared.‚What is it, Mother?™‚It™s improper!™‚What™s improper?™‚It is improper for a lady and gentleman who are notmarried to one another to hold a private conversationwithout a chaperone!™Helen said she was sixty-eight years old, old enough tobe my mother, but Mrs Croft insisted that Helen and I
speak to each other downstairs, in the parlour. She added
that it was also improper for a lady of Helen™s station toreveal her age, and to wear a dress so high above the ankle. ‚For your information, Mother, it™s 1969. What would
you do if you actually left the house one day and saw a girl
in a miniskirt?™Mrs Croft sniffed, ‚I™d have her arrested.™
Helen shook her head and picked up one of the grocerybags. I picked up the other one and followed her throughthe parlour and into the kitchen. The bags were filled withcans of soup, which Helen opened up one by one with a few
cranks of a can opener. She tossed the old soup in the
saucepans into the sink, rinsed the pans under the tap,filled them with soup from the newly opened cans, and putthem back in the refrigerator. ‚A few years ago she could
still open the cans herself,™ Helen said. ‚She hates that I doit for her now. But the piano killed her hands.™ She put on
her spectacles, glanced at the cupboards, and spotted mytea bags. ‚Shall we have a cup?™I filled the kettle on the stove. ‚ I beg your pardon,madame. The piano?™‚She used to give lessons. For forty years. It was howshe raised us after my father died.™ Helen put her hands onher hips, staring at the open refrigerator. She reached into
the back, pulled out a wrapped stick of butter, frowned,
and tossed it into the garbage. ‚That ought to do it,™ she
74Woven Words
said, and put the unopened cans of soup in the cupboard. Isat at the table and watched as Helen washed the dirty
dishes, tied up the garbage bag, watered a spider plantover the sink, and poured boiling water into two cups. Shehanded one to me without milk, the string of the tea bag
trailing over the side, and sat down at the table.‚Excuse me, madame, but is it enough?™Helen took a sip of her tea. Her lipstick left a smilingpink stain on the inside rim of the cup. ‚Is what enough?™‚The soup in the pans. Is it enough food for Mrs Croft?™‚She won™t eat anything else. She stopped eating solidsafter she turned one hundred. That was, let™s see, threeyears ago.™I was mortified. I had assumed Mrs Croft was in hereighties, perhaps as old as ninety. I had never known a
person who had lived for over a century. That this personwas a widow who lived alone mortified me further still. It
was widowhood that had driven my own mother insane.My father, who worked as a clerk at the General Post Office
of Calcutta, died of encephalitis when I was sixteen. Mymother refused to adjust to life without him; instead, shesank deeper into a world of darkness from which neither I,
nor my brother, nor concerned relatives, nor psychiatric
clinics on Rashbihari Avenue could save her. What pained
me most was to see her so unguarded, to hear her burp
after meals or expel gas in front of company without theslightest embarrassment. After my father™s death my brotherabandoned his schooling and began to work in the jutemill he would eventually manage, in order to keep thehousehold running. And so it was my job to sit by mymother™s feet and study for my exams as she counted and
recounted the bracelets on her arm as if they were thebeads of an abacus. We tried to keep an eye on her. Once
she had wandered half naked to the tram depot before we
were able to bring her inside again.‚I am happy to warm Mrs Croft™s soup in the evenings,™I suggested, removing the tea bag from my cup and
squeezing out the liquor. ‚It is no trouble.™
Helen looked at her watch, stood up, and pouredthe rest of her tea into the sink. ‚I wouldn™t if I
The Third and Final Continent75were you. That™s the sort of thing that would killher altogether.™
That evening, when Helen had gone back to Arlingtonand Mrs Croft and I were alone again, I began to worry.Now that I knew how very old she was, I worried that
something would happen to her in the middle of the night,or when I was out during the day. As vigorous as her voicewas, and imperious as she seemed, I knew that even ascratch or a cough could kill a person that old; each dayshe lived, I knew, was something of a miracle. AlthoughHelen had seemed friendly enough, a small part of me
worried that she might accuse me of negligence if anythingwere to happen. Helen didn™t seem worried. She came andwent, bringing soup for Mrs Croft, one Sunday after thenext.In this manner the six weeks of that summer passed. Icame home each evening, after my hours at the library,
and spent a few minutes on the piano bench with MrsCroft. I gave her a bit of my company, and assured her thatI had checked the lock, and told her that the flag on themoon was splendid. Some evenings I sat beside her longafter she had drifted off to sleep, still in awe of how many
years she had spent on this earth. At times I tried to picturethe world she had been born into, in 1866Ša world, Iimagined, filled with women in long black skirts and chaste
conversations in the parlour. Now when I looked at her
hands with their swollen knuckles folded together in herlap, I imagined them smooth and slim, striking the pianokeys. At times I came downstairs, before going to sleep, tomake sure that she was sitting upright on the bench, orwas safe in her bedroom. On Fridays I made sure to put
the rent in her hands. There was nothing I could do for herbeyond these simple gestures. I was not her son and apartfrom those eight dollars, I owed her nothing.At the end of August, Mala™s passport and green cardwere ready. I received a telegram with her flight information;
my brother™s house in Calcutta had no telephone. Around
that time I also received a letter from her, written only a few
days after we had parted. There was no salutation; addressingme by name would have assumed an  intimacy we had not
76Woven Words
yet discovered. It contained only a few lines. ‚I write in Englishin preparation for the journey. Here I am very much lonely. Is
it very cold there. Is there snow. Yours, Mala.™
I was not touched by her words. We had spent only a
handful of days in each other™s company. And yet we werebound together; for six weeks she had worn an iron bangleon her wrist, and applied vermilion powder to the part inher hair, to signify to the world that she was a bride. In
those six weeks I regarded her arrival as I would the arrivalof a coming month, or seasonŠsomething inevitable butmeaningless at the time. So little did I know her that, while
details of her face sometimes rose to my memory, I couldnot conjure up the whole of it.A few days after receiving the letter, as I was walking
to work in the morning, I saw an Indian woman on the
other side of Massachusetts Avenue, wearing a sari withits free end nearly dragging on the footpath, and pushing a
child in a stroller. An American woman with a small black
dog on a leash was walking to one side of her. Suddenly the
dog began barking. From the other side of the street Iwatched as the Indian woman, startled, stopped in herpath, at which point the dog leapt up and seized the end of
the sari between its teeth. The American woman scoldedthe dog, appeared to apologise, and walked quickly away,leaving the Indian woman to fix her sari in the middle of
the footpath, and quiet her crying child. She did not seeme standing there and eventually she continued on herway. Such a mishap, I realised that morning, would soonbe my concern. It was my duty to take care of Mala, towelcome her and protect her. I would have to buy her her
first pair of snow boots, her first winter coat. I would have
to tell her which streets to avoid, which way the trafficcame, tell her to wear her sari so that the free end did notdrag on the footpath. A five-mile separation from her
parents, I recalled with some irritation, had caused her toweep.Unlike Mala, I was used to it all by then: used tocornflakes and milk, used to Helen™s visits, used to sitting
on the bench with Mrs Croft. The only thing I was not usedto was Mala. Nevertheless I did what I had to do. I went to
The Third and Final Continent77the housing office at MIT and found a furnished apartmenta few blocks away, with a double bed and a private kitchen
and bath, for forty dollars a week. One last Friday I handedMrs Croft eight one-dollar bills in an envelope, brought mysuitcase downstairs, and informed her that I was moving.
She put my key into her change purse. The last thing sheasked me to do was to hand her the cane propped againstthe table so that she could walk to the door and lock itbehind me. ‚Good-bye, then,™ she said, and retreated backinto the house. I did not expect any display of emotion butI was disappointed all the same. I was only a boarder, a

man who paid her a bit of money and passed in and out ofher home for six weeks. Compared to a century, it was notime at all.At the airport I recognised Mala immediately. The freeend of her sari did not drag on the floor but was draped ina sign of bridal modesty over her head, just as it had draped
my mother until the day my father died. Her thin brownarms were stacked with gold bracelets, a small red circlewas painted on her forehead and the edges of her feet weretinted with a decorative red dye. I did not embrace her, or
kiss her, or take her hand. Instead I asked her, speaking

Bengali for the first time in America, if she was hungry.I told her I had prepared some egg curry at home. ‚Whatdid they give you to eat on the plane?™‚I didn™t eat.™‚All the way from Calcutta?™‚The menu said oxtail soup.™‚But surely there were other items.™‚The thought of eating an ox™s tail made me lose myappetite.™When we arrived home, Mala opened up one of hersuitcases and presented me with two pullover sweaters,both made with bright blue wool, which she had knitted in
the course of our separation, one with a V neck, the othercovered with cables. I tried them on; both were tight underthe arms. She had also brought me two new pairs of
drawstring pyjamas, a letter from my brother and a packetof loose Darjeeling tea. I had no present for her apart fromthe egg curry. We sat at a bare table, each of us staring at

78Woven Words
our plates. We ate with our hands, another thing I had not
yet done in America.‚The house is nice,™ she said, ‚also the egg curry™. Withher left hand she held the end of her sari to her chest, so itwould not slip off her head.‚I don™t know many recipes.™She nodded, peeling the  skin off each of her potatoesbefore eating them. At one point the sari slipped to hershoulders. She readjusted it at once.‚There is no need to cover your head,™ I said. ‚I don™tmind. It doesn™t matter here.™She kept it covered anyway.I waited to get used to her, to her presence at my side,
at my table and in my bed, but a week later we were stillstrangers. I still was not used to coming home to anapartment that smelled of steamed rice, and finding thatthe basin in the bathroom was always wiped clean, our
two toothbrushes lying side by side, a cake of Pears soapfrom India resting in the soap dish. I was not used to thefragrance of the coconut oil she rubbed every other nightinto her scalp, or the delicate sound her bracelets made asshe moved about the apartment. In the mornings she was
always awake before I was. The first morning when I cameinto the kitchen she had heated up the leftovers and set aplate with a spoonful of salt on its edge on the table,
assuming I would eat rice for breakfast, as most Bengalihusbands did. I told her cereal would do and the nextmorning when I came into the kitchen she had alreadypoured the cornflakes into my bowl. One morning she walkedwith me down Massachusetts Avenue to MIT, where I gaveher a short tour of the campus. On the way we stopped at a
hardware store and I made a copy of the key, so that shecould let herself into the apartment. The next morningbefore I left for work she asked me for a few dollars. I
parted with them reluctantly but I knew that this, too, wasnow normal. When I came home from work there was apotato peeler in the kitchen drawer, and a tablecloth on

the table, and chicken curry made with fresh garlic andginger on the stove. We did not have a television in those
days. After dinner I read the newspaper, while Mala sat at

The Third and Final Continent79the kitchen table, working on a cardigan for herself withmore of the bright blue wool, or writing letters home.At the end of our first week, on Friday, I suggestedgoing out. Mala set down her knitting and disappearedinto the bathroom. When she emerged I regretted the
suggestion; she had put on a clean silk sari and extrabracelets, and coiled her hair with a flattering side part ontop of her head. She was prepared as if for a party, or atthe very least for the cinema, but I had no such destinationin mind. The evening air was balmy. We walked several
blocks down Massachusetts Avenue, looking into the
windows of restaurants and shops. Then, without thinking,I led her down the quiet street where for so many nights Ihad walked alone.‚This is where I lived before you came,™ I said, stoppingat Mrs Croft™s chain-link fence.‚In such a big house?™‚I had a small room upstairs. At the back.™‚Who else lives there?™‚A very old woman.™‚With her family?™‚Alone.™
‚But who takes care of her?™I opened the gate. ‚For the most part she takes care ofherself.™I wondered if Mrs Croft would remember me; I wonderedif she had a new boarder to sit with her on the bench eachevening. When I pressed the bell I expected the same longwait as that day of our first meeting, when I did not have akey. But this time the door was opened almost immediately,by Helen. Mrs Croft was not sitting on the bench. The bench
was gone.‚Hello there,™ Helen said, smiling with her bright pinklips at Mala.‚Mother™s in the parlour. Will you be visiting awhile?™
‚As you wish, madame.™‚Then I think I™ll run to the store, if you don™t mind.She had a little accident. We can™t leave her alone these
days, not even for a minute.™I locked the door after Helen and walked into the
80Woven Words
parlour. Mrs Croft was lying flat on her back, her head on
a peach-coloured cushion, a thin white quilt spread over
her body. Her hands were folded together on top of herchest. When she saw me she pointed at the sofa and toldme to sit down. I took my place as directed but Mala
wandered over to the piano and sat on the bench whichwas now positioned where it belonged.‚I broke my hip! ™ Mrs Croft announced, as if no timehad passed.‚Oh dear, madame.™
‚I fell off the bench!™
‚I am so sorry, madame.™‚It was the middle of the night! Do you know what Idid, boy?™I shook my head.
‚I called the police!™She stared up at the ceiling and grinned sedately,exposing a crowded row of long grey teeth. Not one wasmissing. ‚What do you say to that, boy?™As stunned as I was, I knew what I had to say.With nohesitation at all, I cried out, ‚Splendid!™Mala laughed then. Her voice was full of kindness, hereyes bright with amusement. I had never heard her laugh
before, and it was loud enough so that Mrs Croft had heard,too. She turned to Mala and glared.‚Who is she, boy?™‚She is my wife, madame.™Mrs Croft pressed her head at an angle against thecushion to get a better look, ‚Can you play the piano?™‚No, madame,™ Mala replied.
‚Then stand up!™
Mala rose to her feet, adjusting the end of her sariover her head and holding it to her chest, and, for the first
time since her arrival, I felt sympathy. I remembered my
first days in London, learning how to take the tube to RussellSquare, riding an escalator for the first time, being unableto understand that when the man cried ‚piper™ it meant
‚paper™, being unable to decipher, for a whole year, that the
conductor said ‚mind the gap™ as the train pulled awayfrom each station. Like me, Mala had travelled far from
The Third and Final Continent81home. Not knowing where she was going, or what she wouldfind, for no reason other than to be my wife. As strange as
it seemed, I knew in my heart that one day her death wouldaffect me and, stranger still, that mine would affect her. I
wanted somehow to explain this to Mrs Croft, who was still
scrutinising Mala from top to toe with what seemed to beplacid disdain. I wondered if Mrs Croft had ever seen awoman in a sari, with a dot painted on her forehead andbracelets stacked on her wrists. I wondered what she wouldobject to. I wondered if she could see the red dye still vividon Mala™s feet, all but obscured by the bottom edge of her
sari. At last Mrs Croft declared, with equal measures ofdisbelief and delight I knew well:‚She is a perfect lady!™Now it was I who laughed. I did so quietly and MrsCroft did not hear me. But Mala had heard, and, for the
first time, we looked at each other and smiled.I like to think of that moment in Mrs Croft™s parlour asthe moment when the distance between Mala and me began
to lessen. Although we were not yet fully in love, I like tothink of the months that followed as a honeymoon of sorts.Together we explored the city and met other Bengalis, some
of whom are still friends today. We discovered that a man
named Bill sold fresh fish on Prospect Street, and that ashop in Harvard Square, called Cardullo™s, sold bay leaves
and cloves. In the evenings we walked to the Charles Riverto watch sailboats drift across the water, or had ice cream
cones in Harvard Yard. We bought an Instamatic camera
with which to document our life together, and I took pictures
of her posing in front of the Prudential building so that shecould send them to her parents. At night we kissed, shy at
first but quickly bold, and discovered pleasure and solacein each other™s arms. I told her about my voyage on the SSRoma, and about Finsbury Park and the YMCA, and myevenings on the bench with Mrs Croft. When I told her
stories about my mother, she wept. It was Mala who
consoled me when, reading the Globe one evening, I cameacross Mrs Croft™s obituary. I had not thought of her inseveral monthsŠby then those six weeks of the summerwere already a remote interlude in my pastŠbut when I
82Woven Words
learned of her death I was stricken, so much so that whenMala looked up from her knitting she found me staring at
the wall, the newspaper neglected in my lap, unable tospeak. Mrs Croft™s was the first death I mourned in America,for, hers was the first life I had admired; she had left this

world at last, ancient and alone, never to return.As for me, I have not strayed much farther: Mala and Ilive in a town about twenty miles from Boston, on a tree-
lined street much like Mrs Croft™s, in a house we own, witha garden that saves us from buying tomatoes in summer,
and room for guests. We are American citizens now so that

we can collect social security when it is time. Though wevisit Calcutta every few years, and bring back moredrawstring pyjamas and Darjeeling tea, we have decidedto grow old here. I work in a small college library. We have
a son who attends Harvard University. Mala no longerdrapes the end of her sari over her head, or weeps at night
for her parents but, occasionally, she weeps for our son.So we drive to Cambridge to visit him, or bring him homefor a weekend, so that he can eat rice with us with hishands and speak in Bengali, things we sometimes worryhe will no longer do after we die.Whenever we make that drive, I always make it a pointto take Massachusetts Avenue, in spite of the traffic. I
barely recognise the buildings now but each time I am
there I return instantly to those six weeks as if they wereonly the other day, and I slow down and point to Mrs Croft™sstreet, saying to my son, here was my first home in Americawhere I lived with a woman who was 103. ‚Remember?™Mala says, and smiles, amazed, as I am, that there wasever a time that we were strangers. My son always expresses
his astonishment, not at Mrs Croft™s age, but at how little Ipaid in rent, a  nearly inconceivable amount to him as aflag on the moon was to a woman born in 1866. In my son™s
eyes I see the ambition that had first hurled me across theworld. In a few years he will graduate and pave his way,alone and unprotected. But I remind myself that he has a
father who is still living, a mother who is happy and strong.Whenever he is discouraged, I tell him that if I can surviveon three continents, then there is no obstacle he cannot
The Third and Final Continent83conquer. While the astronauts, heroes forever, spent mere
hours on the moon, I have remained in this new world for
nearly thirty years. I know that my achievement is quiteordinary. I am not the only man to seek his fortune farfrom home and certainly I am not the first. Still, there are
times I am bewildered by each mile I have travelled, eachmeal I have eaten, each person I have known, each room inwhich I have slept. As ordinary as it all appears, there aretimes when it is beyond my imagination.ABOUT THE AUTHORJhumpa Lahiri, an Indian Bengali, born inLondon (1967), lives in New York with her
husband and son. This story is from hercollection, Interpreter of Maladies (1999), abestseller in 2000 both in U.S.A. and elsewhere.In addition to the Pulitzer Prize, she has received
a number of awards for the work which has beentranslated into twenty-nine languages.
Her stories revolve around the lives of Indians indiasporic situations, i.e., of  Indians living abroad,  Indians
who have been brought up in traditional India but are nowencountering the baffling new world [U.S.A.].UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.Indicate the details that tell us that the narrator was not very
financially comfortable during his stay in London.2.How did the narrator adjust to the ways of life first in London
and then in Cambridge, U.S.A.?3.What do you understand of the character of Mrs Croft from the
story?4.What kind of a relationship did Mrs Croft share with her
daughter Helen?5.How does the narrator bring out the contrast between the Indian
way of life and American society? Do you think his wife Malaadjusted comfortably to the new way of life?6.How does the bond of affection between Mrs Croft and the
narrator evolve?
84Woven Words
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss in pairs or in small groups1.Living abroad is challenging in many ways.
2.The Indian family system offers more security to the aged than
what is found in the West.
3.The eccentricities of the old are often endearing.
APPRECIATION1.Discuss the manner in which the author interweaves details of
the narrator™s family with the flow of the main narrative.2.‚Mrs Croft™s was the first death I mourned in America, for, hers
was the first life I had  admired; she had left this world at last,ancient and alone, never to return™Šhow do these lines
encapsulate the bond that is possible between two strangers?3.Examine the pieces of conversation in the story. How do they
reflect the worldview of  each of the speakers?4.There are many instances of gentle humour in the story.  Point
out some of these and state how this contributes to the interestof the narration.LANGUAGE WORK1.‚Don™t expect 
an English cup of tea™Šhow does this phrase bringout the contrast between the English and American attitudes?2.How did the narrator learn to distinguish between ‚a flask™ and
‚a thermos™?3.It took the narrator quite some time to understand that what
he heard as ‚piper™, in fact, meant ‚paper™ and the phrase ‚mindthe gap™ in the Tube. What do you think caused the problem?4.Make a list of items that are referred to differently in British
and American English, for example, ‚lift™ (BE) ‚elevator™ (AmE).5.See if you understand what the following words that are parts
of a house mean. Look up the dictionary if you don™t.parlourfoyerloungeporch
lobbyatticporticoSUGGESTED READING1.Interpreter of Maladies by Jhumpa Lahiri.
