Felling of the Banyan Tree
131
132Woven Words
Felling of theBanyan Tree
Dilip ChitreMy father told the tenants to leaveWho lived on the houses surrounding our house on the hill
One by one the structures were demolished
Only our own house remained and the trees
Trees are sacred my grandmother used to say

Felling them is a crime but he massacred them all
The sheoga, the oudumber, the neem were all cut down

But the huge banyan tree stood like a problemWhose roots lay deeper than all our livesMy father ordered it to be removedThe banyan tree was three times as tall as our houseIts trunk had a circumference of fifty feetIts scraggy aerial roots fell to the ground
From thirty feet or more so first they cut the branches
Sawing them off for seven days and the heap was huge
Insects and birds began to leave the treeAnd then they came to its massive trunkFifty men with axes chopped and chopped
The great tree revealed its rings of two hundred years
We watched in terror and fascination this slaughter

As a raw mythology revealed to us its age
Soon afterwards we left Baroda for Bombay
Where there are no trees except the one10
Felling of the Banyan Tree
133Which grows and seethes in one™s dreams, its aerial rootsLooking for the ground to strike.ABOUT THE POET Dilip Chitre (1938) was born in Baroda. Hewrites poetry both in Marathi and English.Travelling in a Cage,
 from which the poem
selected here has been taken, was publishedin 1980. Apart from poetry, Chitre has alsowritten short stories and critical essays. AnAnthology of Marathi Poetry 1945Œ1965 is one of his most
important works of translation. He sees poetry as anexpression of the spirit. He lives and works in Mumbai.Guess the meaning of the word ‚scraggy™ from the context.UNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.Identify the lines that reveal the critical tone of the poet towards
the felling of the tree.2.Identify the words that help you understand the nature of the
poet™s father.
3.‚Trees are sacred my grandmother 
used to say™Š what doesthe poet imply by this line?4.‚No trees except the one which 
grows and seethes in one™sdreams™Š why is the phrase ‚grows and seethes™ used?5.How does the banyan tree stand out as different from other
trees? What details of the tree does the poet highlight in thepoem?6.What does the reference to raw mythology imply?
7.‚Whose roots lay deeper than our lives™Š what aspect of human
behaviour does this line reflect?8.Comment on the contemporary concern that the poem echoes.

134Woven Words
TRY THIS OUT1.Most of us have had this experience of seeing trees in our
neighbourhood being mercilessly cut down in order to build ahouse or a public building or to widen a road. Describe anysuch experience you have had of the felling of a tree you wereattached to, with reasons for your special attachment to the
tree.2.Find out the equivalents for 
sheoga, oudumber and neem in yourlanguage and English and the equivalent of banyan in yourlanguage.3.The adjective ‚scraggy™ is used to describe ‚roots™ in the poem.
Find out two other items which could be described as ‚scraggy™:scraggy–––––.4.Use the following adjectives to describe suitable items
rawaerialsacred
SUGGESTED READING 1.‚Death of Grandmother™ by Dilip Chitre.

