174Woven Words
What is a Good Book?John RuskinLook for these expressions and guess their meaning from the contextcanaillepeerage
fainnational noblesse of wordsThe good book of the hour, thenŠI do not speak of the bad
onesŠis simply the useful or pleasant talk of some personwhom you cannot otherwise converse with, printed for you.Very useful often, telling you what you need to know; very
pleasant often, as a sensible friend™s present talk wouldbe. These bright accounts of travels; good-humoured andwitty discussions of question; lively or pathetic story-tellingin the form of novel; firm fact-telling by the real agentsconcerned in the events of passing historyŠall these booksof the hour, multiplying among us as education becomes
more general, are a peculiar characteristic and possession
of the present age: we ought to be entirely thankful forthem, and entirely ashamed of ourselves if we make nogood use of them. But we make the worst possible use if we
allow them to usurp the place of true books: for, strictly
speaking, they are not books at all but merely letters ornewspapers in good print. Our friend™s letter may be
delightful, or necessary, today: whether worth keeping ornot, is to be considered. The newspaper may be entirelyproper at breakfast time but, assuredly, it is not reading
for all day. So, though bound up in a volume, the longletter which gives you so pleasant an account of the inns,and roads, and weather last year at such a place, or which
tells you that amusing story or gives you the realcircumstances of such and such events, however valuablefor occasional reference, may not be, in the real sense of5
What is a Good Book?175the word, a ‚book™ at all, nor, in the real sense, to be ‚read™.
A book is essentially not a talked thing but a written thing;
and written, not with the view of more communication, butof permanence. The book of talk is printed only because itsauthor cannot speak to thousands of people at once; if he
could, he wouldŠthe volume is mere ‚multiplication™ of hisvoice. You cannot talk to your friend in India; if you could,
you would; you would write instead: that is mere‚conveyance™ of voice. But a book is written, not to multiplythe voice merely, not to carry it merely, but to preserve it.
The author has something to say which he perceives to be
true and useful, or helpfully beautiful. So far as he knowsno one has yet said it; so far as he knows, no one else cansay it. He is bound to say it, clearly and melodiously if hemay; clearly, at all events. In the sum of his life he findsthis to be the thing or group of things, manifest to himŠthis is the piece of true knowledge, or sight, which his
share of sunshine and earth has permitted him to seize.He would fain set it down forever, engrave it on a rock, if
he could, saying, ‚This is the best of me; for the rest, I ate,and drank, and slept, loved, and hated, like another; mylife was as the vapour, and is not; but this I saw and knew;

this, if anything, of mine, is worth your memory.™ That his‚writing™, it is, in his small human way, and with whateverdegree of true inspiration is in him, his inscription, or
scripture.That is a ‚Book™.Perhaps you think no books were ever so written?
But, again, I ask you; do you at all believe in honestyor, at all, in kindness? Or do you think there is never any
honesty or benevolence in wise people? None of us, I hope,are so unhappy as to think that. Well, whatever bit of a

wise man™s work is honestly and benevolently done, thatbit is his book, or his piece of art. It is mixed always withevil fragmentsŠill-done, redundant, affected work. But if
you read rightly, you will easily discover the true bits, andthose are the book.Now books of this kind have been written in all ages bytheir greatest menŠby great leaders, great statesmen and
great thinkers. These are all at your choice; and life isshort. You have heard as much before; yet have you

176Woven Words
measured and mapped out this short life and itspossibilities? Do you know, if you read this, that you cannot
read thatŠthat what you lose today you cannot gaintomorrow? Will you go and gossip with your housemaid, oryour stable-boy, when you may talk with queens and kings;
or flatter yourselves that it is with any worthyconsciousness of your own claims to respect that you jostlewith the common crowd for entrée here, an audience there,when all the while this eternal court is open to you, withits society wide as the world, multitudinous as its days,the chosen and the mighty, of every place and time? Into
that you may enter always; in that you may take fellowshipand rank according to your wish; from that, once enteredinto it, you can never be outcast but by your own fault; byyour aristocracy of companionship there, your own inherentaristocracy will be assuredly tested and the motives withwhich you strive to take high place in the society of the
living, measured, as to all the truth and sincerity that arein them, by the place you desire to take in this company ofthe Dead.‚The place you desire™, and the place you ‚fit yourselffor™, I must also say; because, observe, this court of the
past differs from all living aristocracy in thisŠit is open tolabour and to merit but to nothing else. No wealth willbribe, no name will overawe, no artifice will deceive the
guardian of those Elysian gates. In the deep sense, no vileor vulgar person ever enters there. At the portieres of thatsilent Faubourg St. Germain, there is but brief question,‚Do you deserve to enter? Pass. Do you ask to be thecompanion of nobles? Do you long for the conversation ofthe wise? Learn to understand it, and you shall hear it.
But on other terms? No. If you will not rise to us, we cannotstoop to you. The living lord may assume courtesy, theliving philosopher explain his thought to you with
considerable pain; but here we neither feign nor interpret;you must rise to the level of our thoughts if you would begladdened by them, and share our feelings, if you would
recognise our presence.™This, then, is what you have to do and I admit that itis much. You must, in a word, love these people if you are

What is a Good Book?177to be among them. No ambition is of any use. They scornyour ambition. You must love them and show your love by

a true desire to be taught by them, and to enter theirthoughts. To enter into theirs, observe; not to find yourown expressed by them. If the person who wrote the book
is not wiser than you, you need not read it; if he be, he willthink differently from you in many respects.Very ready we are to say of a book, ‚How good this isŠ
that™s exactly what I think!™ But the right feeling is, ‚How
strange that is! I never thought of that before and yet I seeit is true; or if I do not now, I hope I shall, some day.™ But
whether thus submissively or not, at least be sure thatyou go to the author to get at his meaning, not to findyours. Judge it afterwards, if you think yourself qualifiedto do so; but ascertain it first. And be sure also, if theauthor is worth anything, that you will get at his meaningall at once; nay, that at his whole meaning you will not for
a long time arrive in any wise. Not that he does not saywhat he means, and in strong words too; but he cannotsay it all; and what is more strange, will not, but in ahidden way and in parables, in order that he may be sureyou want it. I cannot quite see the reason of this, nor analyse
that cruel reticence in the breasts of wise men which makesthem always hide their deeper thoughts. They do not giveit to you by way of help, but of reward, and will make
themselves sure that you deserve it before they allow youto reach it. But it is the same with the physical type ofwisdom, gold. There seems, to you and me, no reason whythe electric forces of the earth should not carry whateverthere is of gold within it at once to the mountain tops, sothat kings and people might know that all the gold they
could get was there; and without any trouble of digging, oranxiety, or chance, or waste of time, cut it away, and coinas much as they needed. But nature does not manage it
so. She puts it in little fissures in the earth, nobody knowswhere: you may dig long and find none; you must digpainfully to find any.And it is just the same with men™s best wisdom. Whenyou come to a good book, you must ask yourself, ‚Am I
inclined to work as an Australian miner would? Are my
178Woven Words
pickaxes and shovels in good order and am I in good trimmyself, my sleeves well up to the elbow, and my breath
good, and my temper?™ And, keeping the figure a little longer,
even at the cost of tiresomeness, for it is a thoroughlyuseful one, the metal you are in search of being the author™s
mind or meaning, his words are as the rock which youhave to crush and smelt in order to get at it. And yourpickaxes are your own care, wit and learning; your smeltingfurnace is your own thoughtful soul. Do not hope to get atany good author™s meaning without these tools and thatfire; often you will need sharpest, finest chiselling, and
patientest fusing, before you can gather one grain of metal.And, therefore, first of all, I tell you, earnestly andauthoritatively (I know I am right in this), you must getinto the habit of looking intensely at words and assuringyourself of their meaning, syllable by syllableŠnay, letterby letter. For, though it is only by reason of the opposition

of letters in the function of signs, to sounds in the functionof signs, that the study of books is called ‚literature™, andthat a man versed in it is called, by the consent of nations,a man of letters instead of a man of books, or of words, youmay yet connect with that accidental nomenclature this
real principle: that you might read all the books in theBritish Museum (if you could live long enough), and remainan utterly ‚illiterate™, uneducated person; but that if you
read ten pages of a good book, letter by letterŠthat is tosay, with real accuracyŠyou are forever more in somemeasure with an educated person. The entire differencebetween education and non-education (as regards themerely intellectual part of it), consists in this accuracy. Awell-educated gentleman may not know many languagesŠ
may not be able to speak any but his ownŠmay have readvery few books. But whatever language he knows, he knowsprecisely; whatever word he pronounces, he pronounces
rightly; above all, he is learned in the peerage of words;knows the words of true descent and ancient blood, at aglance, from words of modern canaille; remembers all their
ancestryŠtheir inter-marriages, distantest relationships,
and the extent to which they were admitted, and officesthey held, among the national noblesse of words at any
What is a Good Book?179time, and in any country. But an uneducated person mayknow by memory any number of languages and talk them
all, and yet truly not know a word of anyŠnot a word evenof his own. An ordinarily clever and sensible seaman willbe able to make his way ashore at most ports; yet he has
only to speak a sentence of any language to be known foran illiterate person: so also the accent, or turn of expressionof a single sentence will at once mark a scholar. And this
so strongly felt, so conclusively admitted, by educatedpersons, that a false accent or a mistaken syllable isenough, in the parliament of any civilized nation, to assign
a man a certain degree of inferior standing forever. And
this is right; but it is a pity that the accuracy insisted onis not greater, and required to a serious purpose. It is right
that a false Latin quantity should excite a smile in theHouse of Commons; but it is wrong that a false Englishmeaning should not excite a frown there. Let the accent ofwords be watched, by all means, but let the meaning bewatched more closely still, and fewer will do the work. Afew words, well chosen and well distinguished, will do workthat a thousand cannot, when everyone is acting,equivocally, in the function of another. Yes; and words, if

they are not watched, will do deadly work sometimes.ABOUT THE AUTHORJohn Ruskin (1819Œ1900) was a powerful andinfluential critic of the nineteenth century. Hewrote on a variety of subjects: nature, art,architecture, politics, history. All his work is
characterised by a clarity of vision.His first volume, Modern Painters, appeared in 1843Šit
defended modernism in the arts among the works of socialcriticism are Unto this Last (1862), and Sesame and Lilies(1871) from which this extract has been taken.
His ideas on architecture are presented in The Seven Lampsof Architecture
 (1849) and The Stones of Venice 
(1853).
180Woven Words
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.What, according to Ruskin, are the limitations of the good book
of the hour?2.What are the criteria that Ruskin feels that readers should fulfil
to make themselves fit for the company of the Dead.3.Why does Ruskin feel that reading the work of a good author is
a painstaking task?4.What is the emphasis placed by Ruskin on accuracy?
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss in pairs1.Ruskin™s insistence on looking intensely at words, and assuring
oneself of meaning, syllable by syllableŠnay, letter by letter.
2.Choice of diction is very crucial to the communication of
meaning.APPRECIATION1.The text is an excerpt from 
Sesame and Lilies which consists oftwo essays, primarily, written for delivery as public lectures in1864. Identify the features that fit the speech mode. Notice thesentence patterns.2.The lecture was delivered in 1864. What are the shifts in style
and diction that make the language different from the way it isused today?LANGUAGE WORK1.Many sentences and paragraphs in the excerpt begin with the
word ‚And™.  To what extent does this contribute to the rhetoricalstyle of the lecture?2.Study each of the following sentences and notice the balance
between its parts. Pick out other sentences in the text that reflectthis kind of balancea.It is right that a false Latin quantity should excite a smilein the House of Commons; but it is wrong that a false English
meaning should not excite a frown there.b.Let the accent of words be watched, by all means, but let
the meaning be watched more closely still, and fewer will do

the work.
What is a Good Book?181SUGGESTED READING1.Sesame and Lilies by John Ruskin2.Seven Lamps of Architecture by John Ruskin
