The Lament1SHORT STORIESINTRODUCTIONA short story is a brief work of prose fiction. It has a plotwhich may be comic, tragic, romantic or satiric; the storyis presented to us from one of the many available points ofview, and it may be written in the mode of fantasy, realism
or naturalism.In the ‚story of incident™ the focus of interest is on the courseand outcome of events, as in the Sherlock Holmes story.The ‚story of character™ focuses on the state of mind andmotivation, or on the psychological and moral qualities of
the protagonist, as in Glory at Twilight. Chekov™s The Lamentfocuses on formŠnothing happens, or seems to happen,
except an encounter and conversations, but the story
becomes a revelation of deep sorrow.The short story differs from the novel in magnitude. Thelimitation of length imposes economy of management and
in literary effects. However, a short story can also attain a
fairly long and complex form, where it approaches theexpansiveness of the novel, which you may find in TheThird and Final Continent in this unit.
2Woven Words
The LamentAnton ChekhovGuess the meaning of these expressions from the contextgingerbread horsesloughsnuffleas if he 
were on needlesIt is twilight. A thick wet snow is slowly twirling aroundthe newly lighted street lamps and lying in soft thin layerson roofs, on horses™ backs, on people™s shoulders and hats.The cabdriver, Iona Potapov, is quite white and looks like a
phantom: he is bent double as far as a human body canbend double; he is seated on his box; he never makes amove. If a whole snowdrift fell on him, it seems as if hewould not find it necessary to shake it off. His little horseis also quite white, and remains motionless; its immobility,its angularity and its straight wooden-looking legs, evenclose by, give it the appearance of a gingerbread horse
worth a kopek. It is, no doubt, plunged in deep thought. Ifyou were snatched from the plough, from your usual gray
surroundings, and were thrown into this slough full of
monstrous lights, unceasing noise and hurrying people,you too would find it difficult not to think.Iona and his little horse have not moved from theirplace for a long while. They left their yard before dinner
and, up to now, not a fare. The evening mist is descendingover the town, the white lights of the lamps are replacing
brighter rays, and the hubbub of the street is getting louder.
‚Cabby for Viborg Way!™ suddenly hears Iona. ‚Cabby!™
Iona jumps and, through his snow-covered eyelashes,sees an officer in a greatcoat, with his hood over his head.‚Viborg way!™ the officer repeats. ‚Are you asleep, eh?Viborg way!™1
The Lament3With a nod of assent Iona picks up the reins, inconsequence of which layers of snow slip off the horse™sback and neck. The officer seats himself in the sleigh, thecabdriver smacks his lips to encourage his horse, stretchesout his neck like a swan, sits up and, more from habit
than necessity, brandishes his whip. The little horse alsostretches its neck, bends its wooden-looking legs, and
makes a move undecidedly.‚What are you doing, werewolf!™ is the exclamation Ionahears from the dark mass moving to and fro, as soon asthey have started.‚Where the devil are you going? To the r-r-right!™
‚You do not know how to drive. Keep to the right!™ calls
the officer angrily.A coachman from a private carriage swears at him; apasserby, who has run across the road and rubbed hisshoulder against the horse™s nose, looks at him furiously
as he sweeps the snow from his sleeve. Iona shifts abouton his seat as if he were on needles, moves his elbows as ifhe were trying to keep his equilibrium, and gasps aboutlike someone suffocating, who does not understand whyand wherefore he is there.‚What scoundrels they all are!™ jokes the officer; ‚onewould think they had all entered into an agreement to jostle
you or fall under your horse.™Iona looks around at the officer and moves his lips. Heevidently wants to say something but the only sound that
issues is a snuffle.‚What?™ asks the officer.
Iona twists his mouth into a smile and, with an effort,says hoarsely:‚My son, Barin, died this week.™
‚Hm! What did he die of?™Iona turns with his whole body towards his fare andsays: ‚And who knows! They say high fever. He was three
days in the hospital and then died– God™s will be done.™ﬁTurn round! The devil!™ sounds from the darkness.‚Have you popped off, old doggie, eh? Use your eyes!™‚Go on, go on,™ says the officer, ‚otherwise we shall not
get there by tomorrow. Hurry up a bit!™
