182Woven Words
The StoryE.M. ForsterLook for these expressions and guess their meaning from the contextatavisticshock-heads
ingeniousWe shall all agree that the fundamental aspect of the novel
is its story-telling aspect, but we shall voice our assent indifferent tones, and it is on the precise tone of voice weemploy now that our subsequent conclusions will depend.Let us listen to three voices. If you ask one type ofman, ‚What does a novel do?™ he will reply placidly, ‚WellŠ
I don™t knowŠit seems a funny sort of question to askŠanovel™s a novelŠwell, I don™t knowŠI suppose it kind oftells a story, so to speak™. He is quite good tempered and
vague, and probably driving a motor-bus at the same time
and paying no more attention to literature than it merits.Another man, whom I visualise as on a golf-course, will be
aggressive and brisk. He will reply, ‚What does a novel do?Why, tell a story of course and I™ve no use for it if it didn™t.I like a story. Very bad taste, on my part, no doubt, but I
like a story. You can take your art, you can take your
literature, you can take your music, but give me a goodstory. And I like a  story to be a story, mind, and my wife™s
the same.™ And a third man, he says in a sort of droopingregretful voice, ‚YesŠoh dear yesŠthe novel tells a story.™ I
respect and admire the first speaker. I detest and fear the

second. And the third is myself. YesŠoh dear yesŠthe novel
tells a story. That is the fundamental aspect without whichit could not exist. That is the highest factor common to all
novels, and I wish that it was not so, that it could besomething differentŠmelody, or perception of truth, notthis low atavistic form.6
The Story183For, the more we look at the story (the story that is a
story, mind) the more we disentangle it from the finergrowths that it supports, the less shall we find to admire.It runs like a backboneŠor may I say a tape-wormŠfor itsbeginning and end are arbitrary. It is immensely oldŠgoes
back to Neolithic times, perhaps to Palaeolithic.Neanderthal man listened to stories, if one may judge bythe shape of his skull. The primitive audience was anaudience of shock-heads, gaping round the campfire,fatigued with contending against the mammoth or the woollyrhinoceros, and only kept awake by suspense. What would
happen next? The novelist droned on and, as soon as theaudience guessed what happened next, they either fellasleep or killed him. We can estimate the dangers incurred
when we think of the career of Scheherazade in somewhatlater times. Scheherazade avoided her fate because sheknew how to wield the weapon of suspenseŠthe only
literary tool that has any effect on tyrants and savages.Great novelist though she wasŠexquisite in herdescriptions, tolerant in her judgements, ingenious in herincidents, advanced in her morality, vivid in her delineationsof character, expert in her knowledge of three Oriental

capitalsŠit was yet on none of these gifts that she reliedwhen trying to save her life from her intolerable husband.They were but incidental. She only survived because she
managed to keep the king wondering what would happennext. Each time she saw the sun rising she stopped in themiddle of a sentence, and left him gaping. ‚At this momentScheherazade saw the morning appearing and, discreet,was silent.™ This uninteresting little phrase is the backboneof the One Thousand and One Nights, the tape-worm bywhich they are tied together and by which the life of amost accomplished princess was preserved.We are like Scheherazade™s husband in that we want
to know what happens next. That is universal and that is
why the backbone of a novel has to be a story. Some of uswant to know nothing elseŠthere is nothing in us but
primeval curiosity and, consequently, our other literaryjudgements are ludicrous. And now the story can be defined.It is a narrative of events arranged in their time sequenceŠ
184Woven Words
dinner coming after breakfast, Tuesday coming afterMonday, decay after death, and so on. Qua story, it canonly have one merit; that of making the audience want toknow what happens next. And, conversely, it can have onlyone fault: that of making the audience not want to know
what happens next. These are the only two criticisms thatcan be made on the story. It is the lowest and simplest ofliterary organisms. Yet it is the highest factor common to
all the very complicated organisms known as novels.When we isolate the story like this from the nobleraspects through which it moves, and hold it out on forcepsŠ
wriggling and interminable, the naked worm of timeŠitpresents an appearance that is both unlovely and dull.But we have much to learn from it. Let us begin byconsidering it in connection with daily life.Daily life is also full of the time sense. We think one
event occurs after or before another, the thought is often

in our minds, and much of our talk and action proceedsfrom that assumption. Much of our talk and action, butnot all; there seems something else in life besides time,something which may conveniently be called ‚value™,something which is measured not by minutes or hours,
but by intensity, so that when we look at our past it doesnot stretch back evenly but piles up into a few pinnaclesand when we look at the future it seems sometimes a wall,
sometimes a cloud, sometimes a sun, but never achronological chart. Neither memory nor anticipation ismuch interested in Father Time, and all dreamers, artists
and lovers are partially delivered from his tyranny; he cankill them but he cannot secure their attention and, at thevery moment of doom when the clock collected in the tower
its strength and struck, they may be looking the other way.So daily life, whatever it may be really, is practicallycomposed of two livesŠthe life in time and the life by
valuesŠand our conduct reveals a double allegiance. ‚I onlysaw her for five minutes, but it was worth it.™ There youhave both allegiances in a single sentence. And what the
story does is to narrate the life in time. And what the entirenovel doesŠif it is a good novelŠis to include the life byvalues as well; using devices hereafter to be examined. It,
The Story185also, pays a double allegiance. But in it, the novel, theallegiance to time is imperative: no novel could be written
without it. Whereas, in daily life, the allegiance may not benecessary; we do not know, and the experience of certainmystics suggests, indeed, that it is not necessary, and that
we are quite mistaken in supposing that Monday is followedby Tuesday, or death by decay. It is always possible for youor me in daily life to deny that time exists and actaccordingly even if we become unintelligible and are sentby our fellow citizens to what they choose to call a lunaticasylum. But it is never possible for a novelist to deny time
inside the fabric of his novel: he must cling, however lightly,to the thread of his story, he must touch the interminabletape-worm otherwise he becomes unintelligible, which, inhis case, is a blunder.
I am trying not to be philosophic about time for it is(experts assure us) a most dangerous hobby for an outsider,

far more fatal than place; and quite eminent metaphysicianshave been dethroned through referring to it improperly. Iam only trying to explain that as I lecture now I hear theclock ticking, I retain or lose the time sense; whereas, in anovel, there is always a clock. The author may dislike the
clock. Emily Bronte in Wuthering Heights tried to hide hers.Sterne, in 
Tristram Shandy
, turned it upside down. Marcel
Proust, still more ingenious, kept altering the hands so
that his hero was at the same time entertaining a mistressto supper and playing ball with his nurse in the park. Allthese devices are legitimate but none of them contraveneour thesis: the basis of a novel is a story and a story is anarrative of events in time sequence.From Aspects of the Novel : A NoteThese are some lectures (the Clark Lectures) which weredelivered under the auspices of Trinity College, Cambridge,in the spring of 1927. They were informal, indeed talkative,in their tone and it seemed safer when presenting them in
book form not to mitigate the talk, in case nothing shouldbe left at all. Words such as ‚I™, ‚you™ ‚one™, ‚we™, ‚curiously
enough™, ‚so to speak™, ‚only imagine™ and ‚of course™ will
consequently occur on every page and will rightly distress
186Woven Words
the sensitive reader; but he is asked to remember that ifthese words were removed, others, perhaps more
distinguished, might escape through the orifices they leftand that since the novel is itself often colloquial it maypossibly withhold some of its secrets from the graver and
grander streams of criticism and may reveal them tobackwaters and shallows.The 1001 Arabian NightsThe 1001 Arabian Nights is a collection of stories looselylinked together, narrated by a young girl Scheherazade.
She was the daughter of the vizier, or minister, who had to

serve a peculiar king. The king married on a daily basis:his wife was always beheaded after the wedding night.Scheherazade tells her father that she wished to marrythe king. He reluctantly agrees. She tells the king an
interesting story on their wedding night, and makes sureto stop at an interesting point at the crack of dawn. The
king is unwilling to execute her because he wants to hearthe end of the story. This scheme was extremely risky, butScheherazade is successful in continually linking storiesover many nights until, finally, the king accepts her as hisqueen and stops the horrible practice of executing his wife.ABOUT THE AUTHORE.M. Forster (1879Œ1970), a noted Englishauthor and critic, wrote a number of short
stories, novels and essays. His first novel,
Where Angels Fear to Tread
, was publishedin 1905. This was followed by Howard™s Endand A Passage to India and other well-known works. TheHill of Devi, a portrait of India with a commentary, appearedin 1953. The essay presented here is an excerpt fromchapter two of Aspects of the Novel.UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.What do you understand of the three voices in response to the
question ‚What does a novel do™?
The Story1872.What would you say are ‚the finer growths™ that the story
supports in a novel?3.How does Forster trace the human interest in the story to
primitive times?4.Discuss the importance of time in the narration of a story.
TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss in pairs or in small groups1.What does a novel do?
2.‚Our daily life reflects a double allegiance to ‚the life in time™
and  ‚the life by values™.3.     The description of  novels as organisms.APPRECIATION1.How does Forster use the analogy of Scheherazade to establish
his point?2.Taking off from Forster™s references to Emily Bronte, Sterne and
Proust, discuss the treatment of time in some of the novels youhave read.LANGUAGE WORK1.    ‚Qua story™: what does the word mean? Find other expressionsusing the word qua.2.Study the Note to 
Aspects of the Novel  given at the end. Discussthe features that mark the piece as a talk as distinguishedfrom a critical essay.3.Try rewriting the lecture as a formal essay and examine Forster™s
statement: ‚–since the novel is itself often colloquial, it maypossibly withhold some of its secrets from the graver andgrander streams of criticism™.SUGGESTED READING1.The Craft of Fiction by Percy Lubbock2.The Sense of an Ending by Frank Kermode.
