150Woven Words
My Three PassionsBertrand RussellFrom the context of the passage, guess the meaning of the wordsand phrases in the boxwayward courseocean of anguishverge of despairmystic miniatureunfathomableabyssapprehendreverberate
Three passions, simple but overwhelmingly strong, havegoverned my life: the longing for love, the search forknowledge, and unbearable pity for the suffering of mankind.These passions, like great winds, have blown me hitherand thither, in a wayward course, over a deep ocean of
anguish, reaching to the very verge of despair.
I have sought love, first, because it brings ecstasyŠecstasy so great that I would often have sacrificed all the
rest of life for a few hours of this joy. I have sought it, next,
because it relieves lonelinessŠthat terrible loneliness inwhich one shivering consciousness looks over the rim ofthe world into the cold unfathomable lifeless abyss. I have
sought it, finally, because in the union of love, I have seen,in a mystic miniature, the prefiguring vision of the heaventhat saints and poets have imagined. This is what I soughtand, though it might seem too good for human life, this iswhat at least I have found.With equal passion, I have sought knowledge. I havewished to understand the hearts of men. I have wished to
know why the stars shine. And I have tried to apprehendthe Pythagorean power by which number holds sway over
the flux. A little of this, but not much, I have achieved.Love and knowledge, so far as they were possible, ledupward toward the heavens. But always pity brought me
back to earth. Echoes of cries of pain reverberate in my2
My Three Passions151heart. Children in famine, victims tortured by oppressors,helpless old people a hated burden to their sons, and thewhole world of loneliness, poverty and pain make a mockeryof what human life should be. I long to alleviate the evil,but I cannot, and I too suffer.
This has been my life. I have found it worth living, andwould gladly live it again if the chance were offered to me.ABOUT THE AUTHORBertrand Russell (1872Œ1969), the Britishphilosopher and mathematician, has writtennumerous popular works on philosophy, politicsand education. He took a major part in the
twentieth century revival of logic and madecontinued effort to identify the methods of philosophy withthose of the sciences. He received the Nobel Prize for
literature in 1950. The above passage is an extract fromBertrand Russell™s Autobiography.UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.Why does Russell call the three passions ‚simple™?
2.Why has he compared the three passions to great winds?

3.What, according to Russell, is the importance of love in life?
4.How does Russell™s definition of knowledge differ from what is
commonly understood by the term?5.Why is the quality of pity earth-bound while the other two
passions are elevating?6.How have the three passions contributed to the quality of
Russell™s life?Read the summary of Martin Luther™s King™s distinction betweenthree kinds of love given below.King™s sixth point was central to the method of non-violent resistance.He believed that the importance of non-violence rested in the fact that
it prevented physical violence and the ‚internal violence of spirit™.
Bitterness and hate were absent from the resister™s mind, and replaced...cont.
152Woven Words
with love. However, the kind of love King was talking about was not the
affectionate type but, instead, the type that meant ‚understanding,redeeming good will for all people™. He further explained that in the
Greek New Testament, there were three words for love and each had adifferent meaning. Eros was romantic love and philla was a reciprocallove. Neither of these two types of love were the kind that King advanced.Agape, which was not a passive love, was the kind of redemptive love hereferred to. According to King, ﬁIt is an overflowing love which is purelyspontaneous, unmotivated, groundless and creative. It is not set in
motion by any quality or function of its object. It is the love of Godoperating in the human heart.ﬂAdditionally, it was a love that was disinterested. The act of loving
was not for one™s own good but for the good of another. It did not
distinguish between worthy and unworthy people or friends andenemies. Furthermore, it was love that fulfilled the need of another
person. A person was in greatest need of love when a sinner.
King also believed that agape sought to preserve and create community.As a result, no distance was too far to travel in the attempt to restorecommunity. Agape was,...a willingness to forgive, not seven times, but seventy times to
restore community. The cross is the eternal expression of the
length to which God will go in order to restore broken community.The resurrection is a symbol of God™s triumph over all the forcesthat seek to block community. The Holy Spirit is the continuingcommunity creating reality that moves through history. He whoworks against community is working against the whole of creation.Thus, hateful responses promote a broken community and instead onemust respond to hate with love in order to avoid becoming depersonalisedand to fix a broken community.
Lastly, agape means that every aspect of life is interrelated. All humanbeings are related to one another and by harming another they harm
themselves.
Martin Luther King was a man who believed that the power of lovecould be the most effective weapon against the social ills of society. Hepromoted resistance that was nonviolent and, in the end, it proved to
be the most successful method against an unjust system of segregation.†How does Russell™s concept of love and pity tie up with King™s
concepts of agape?SUGGESTED READING1.‚Ideas that have Helped Mankind™ by Bertrand Russell
2.‚Ideas that have Harmed Mankind™ by Bertrand Russell.

