134Woven words

Ode to a Nightingale135Ode to a NightingaleJohn KeatsMy heart aches, and a drowsy numbnesspainsMy sense, as though of hemlock I haddrunk,Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
One minute past, and Lethe-wards had
sunk:™Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,
But being too happy in thine happiness,
That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,
In some melodious plot
Of beechen green, and shadowsnumberless,Singest of summer in full-throated ease.Lethe: in ancientGreek mythology, animaginary riverwhose water, when
drunk, was thought
to make the dead
forget their life on
Earth.Dryad: in stories, afemale spirit that livesin a tree.11
136Woven words
***O, for a draught of vintage! that hath beenCool™d a long age in the deep-delved earth,Tasting of Flora and the country green,Dance, and Provencal song, and sunburntmirth!O, for a beaker full of the warm South,
Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,
With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,
And purple-stained mouth;
That I might drink, and leave the worldunseen,And with thee fade away into the forestdim.***Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forgetWhat thou among the leaves hast never
knownThe weariness, the fever, and the fret

Here, where men sit and hear each othergroan;Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last grayhairs,Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin,and dies;Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
And leaden-eyed despairs,
Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrouseyes,Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.***Provencal:(pronounced
Provensaal) of thedistrict of  Provencein France, known for
its bards and its
grapevines.Hippocrene:  afountain in MountHelicon associated
with poetry; in the
poem it refers to the
wine that inspirespoetic ability.
Ode to a Nightingale137Thou wast not born for death, immortalBird!No hungry generations tread thee down;The voice I hear this passing night washeardIn ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found apathThrough the sad heart of Ruth, when, sickfor home,She stood in tears amid the alien corn;
The same that oft-times hath
Charm™d magic casements, opening on thefoamOf perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.***Forlorn! the very word is like a bell
To toll me back from thee to my sole self!Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well
As she is fam™d to do, deceiving elf.
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
Past the near meadows, over the stillstream,Up the hill-side; and now ™tis buried deep
In the next valley-glades:
Was it a vision, or a waking dream?

Fled is that music:ŠDo I wake or sleep?
ABOUT THE POET John Keats (1795Œ1821) was one of thegreatest of the younger generation of‚English Romantic™ poets. He started hiscareer as an apprentice to a surgeon butRuth: a woman in theBible who left herown people to livewith her mother-in-
law, Naomi. After the
death of her
husband, marries
Boaz and is theancestor of King
David.
138Woven words
soon gave it up for poetry. His poetic career lasted for onlyfour years but, during this short span, he evolved from an
ordinary poet to an exceptionally mature poetic force. Hispoetry celebrates beauty, which he considered the ultimatetruth. It is portrayed in extremely sensuous images that
have been created through beautiful verbal pictures. Theimage of the nightingale™s bower in the poem is an aptillustration of the poet™s craft in this respect.Look for these words and guess their meanings from the contexthemlockdeep-delved
earthforlornbeechen greendeceiving elfplaintive anthemUNDERSTANDING THE POEM1.How does the nightingale™s song plunge the poet into a state of
ecstasy?2.What are the unpleasant aspects of the human condition that
the poet wants to escape from?3.What quality of ‚beauty™ and ‚love™ does the poem highlight?
4.How does the poet bring out the immortality of the bird?

5.How is the poet tossed back from ecstasy into despair?

6.How does the poem bring out the elusive nature of happiness in
human existence?TRY THIS OUT1.The poet has juxtaposed sets of opposites like  
numbness  pains,waking dream. How does this contribute to the poetic effect?What is this figure of speech called? List other such pairs frompoems that you have read.2.The poet has evoked the image of wineŠwhy has this image
been chosen?3.The senses of sound, sight and taste are evoked in the poem.
Locate instances of these.
Ode to a Nightingale1394.The poet addresses the nightingale and talks to the bird
throughout the poem. What is this kind of poem called?5.Make a list of all the adjectives in the poem along with the nouns
they describe. List the phrases that impressed you most in thepoem.6.Find out the other odes written by Keats and read them.
7.Find out the odes written by Shelley and read them.
SUGGESTED READING 1.The complete version of ‚Ode to a Nightingale™ by John Keats
2.‚Ode to the West Wind™ by P.B. Shelley.

