Tribal Verse
161Tribal Verse
G.N. DevyLook for these expressions in the text and guess the meaning fromthe contextmarginalisation of communities 
  accelerated pacecanonized written texts                  rich repository of folk songstribal vision of life                   cohesive and organically unifieditinerant street singersINTRODUCTIONThe roots of India™s literary traditions can be traced to therich oral literatures of the tribes/adivasis. Usually in theform of songs or chanting, these verses are expressions ofthe close contact between the world of nature and the worldof tribal existence. They have been orally transmitted fromgeneration to generation and have survived for several ages.However, a large number of these are already lost due to
the very fact of their orality. The forces of urbanisation,print culture and commerce have resulted in not just themarginalisation of these communities but also of their
languages and literary cultures. Though some attemptshave been made for the collection and conservation of triballanguages and their literatures, without more concerted
efforts at an acelerated pace, we are in danger of losing aninvaluable part of our history and rich literary heritage.This section is a small attempt to familiarise studentswith some aspects of the enormous wealth of oral tribal
literature. It begins with an extract from an essay by G.N.Devy in which he discusses the need to create a space for
the study of tribal literature within the framework ofcanonized written texts. What he argues for is the need for a
4
162Woven Words
new method to identify and read literature in which oralityis not dismissed as casual utterances in different dialects.This is followed by two songsŠone sung on the occasionof childbirth by the Munda tribals and the other on theoccasion of death by the Kondh tribals. The third verse is a
chanting in the ritualistic religious language of the Aditribe, not the same as their language of conversation. Eventhough this is merely a small representation of a treasureof tribal/adivasi songs, it indicates the immense diversitythat exists amongst tribal groups. Inevitably influenced bytheir very specific historical, cultural and geographical
locations, tribal societies continue to retain and reproducetheir distinctive traditions which usually find expressionthrough their different languages. However, it is equally
true that though possessing their very specific languages,most tribal societies such as Munda, Kondh, Adi and Bondoare bilingual. Moreover, while tribal groups like the Santhal

become important subjects in dominant literary streamssuch as Bangla literature, there is a fairly well developedSanthali literature too. Besides this, tribes like Santhaland Munda have also played a prominent role in the socio-political movements of their regions. [Birsa Munda
(1874Œ1901) spent his whole life fighting againstcolonialism and the exploitation of labourers]. The Santhalshave emerged as a prominent group at the regional and
state levels through their participation in the JharkhandMovement.The three selected songs give us a small glimpse intothe rich repository of folk songs that is an expression ofthe tribal vision of life. Their close connection with natureis evident from their belief in the interdependence between
human beings and nature. Nature for them is living andresponsive to human existence and human actions,demanding respect essential for any kind of coexistence.The songs exist originally in the native languages ofthe tribals and are sung or chanted. The effort to bring
them to students in English naturally involves some loss
of the original flavour and spirit but that is a problem of alltranslation and constant attempts need to be made tominimise this loss. But for some conscious effort being
Tribal Verse
163made to first preserve these songs, these pieces of literaturewould have been lost to us completely. However limitedly,
it is only through translation that we are able to even accessthese works.‚INTRODUCTION™ TO PAINTED WORDS...Most tribal communities in India are culturallysimilar to tribal communities elsewhere in the world. Theylive in groups that are cohesive and organically unified.They show very little interest in accumulating wealth or inusing labour as a device to gather interest and capital.They accept a world-view in which nature, human beings
and God are intimately linked and they believe in the humanability to spell and interpret truth. They live more by intutionthan reason, they consider the space around them more
sacred than secular, and their sense of time is personal
rather than objective. The world of the tribal imagination,therefore, is radically different from that of modern Indian
society.Once a society accepts a secular mode of creativitywithin which the creator replaces God, imaginativetransactions assume a self-conscious form. The tribal
imagination, on the other hand, is still, to a large extent,
164Woven Words
dreamlike and hallucinatory. It admits fusion betweenvarious 
planes of existence and levels of time in a naturalway. In tribal stories, oceans fly in the sky as birds, mountainsswim in the water as fish, animals speak as humans andstars grow like plants. Spatial order and temporal sequence
do not restrict the narrative. This is not to say that tribalcreations have no conventions or rules but simply that theyadmit the principle of association between emotion and thenarrative motif. Thus stars, seas, mountains, trees, men andanimals, can be angry, sad or happy.It might be said that tribal artists work more on thebasis of their racial and sensory memory than on the basis
of a cultivated imagination. In order to understand thisdistinction, we must understand the difference betweenimagination and memory. In the animate world,consciousness meets two immediate material realities:space and time. We put meaning into space by perceiving

it in terms of images. The image making faculty is a geneticgift to the human mindŠthis power of imagination helpsus understand the space that envelops us. In the case oftime, we make connections with the help of memory; oneremembers being the same person as one was yesterday.The tribal mind has a more acute sense of time thansense of space. Somewhere along the history of human
civilization, tribal communities seem to have realised that
domination over territorial space was not their lot. Thus,they seem to have turned almost obsessively to gainingdomination over time. This urge is substantiated in theirritual of conversing with their dead ancestors: year afteryear, tribals in many parts of India worship terracotta, or
carved-wood objects, representing their ancestors, aspiring
to enter a trance in which they can converse with the dead.Over the centuries, an amazingly sharp memory has helpedtribals classify material and natural objects into a highly
complex system of knowledge. The importance of memoryin tribal systems of knowledge has not yet been sufficientlyrecognised but the aesthetic proportions of the houses that
tribals build, the objects they make and the rituals theyperform fascinate the curious onlooker. It can be hard to
understand how, without any institutional training or
Tribal Verse
165tutoring, tribals are able to dance, sing, craft, build andspeak so well ...A vast number of Indian languages have yet remainedonly spoken, with the result that literary compositions inthese languages are not considered ‚literature™. They are a
feast for the folklorist, anthropologist and linguist but, to aliterary critic, they generally mean nothing. Similarly,several nomadic Indian communities are broken up andspread over long distances but survive as communitiesbecause they are bound by their oral epics. The wealth andvariety of these works is so enormous that one discovers
their neglect with a sense of pure shame. Some of the songsand stories I heard from itinerant street singers in mychildhood are no longer available anywhere. For some yearsnow I have been collecting songs and stories that circulatein India™s tribal languages, and I am continuallyoverwhelmed by their number and their profound influence
on the tribal communities.The result is that I, for one, can no longer think ofliterature as something written. Of course I do not disputethe claim of written compositions and texts to the status ofliterature; but surely it is time we realise that unless we
modify the established notion of literature as somethingwritten, we will silently witness the decline of variousIndian oral traditions. That literature is a lot more than
writing is a reminder necessary for our times.One of the main characteristics of tribal arts is theirdistinct manner of constructing space and imagery, whichmight be described as ‚hallucinatory™. In both oral and visualforms of representation, tribal artists seem to interpretverbal or pictorial space as demarcated by an extremely
flexible ‚frame™. The boundaries between art and non-artbecome almost invisible. A tribal epic can begin its narrationfrom a trivial everyday event; tribal paintings merge with
living space as if the two were one and the same. Andwithin the narrative itself, or within the painted imagery,there is no deliberate attempt to follow a sequence. The
episodes retold and the images created take on theapparently chaotic shapes of dreams. In a tribal Ramayan,an episode from the Mahabharat makes a sudden and
166Woven Words
surprising appearance; tribal paintings contain a curiousmixture of traditional and modern imagery. In a way, the
syntax of language and the grammar of painting are thesame, as if literature were painted words and painting werea song of images.Yet it is not safe to assume that the tribal arts do not
employ any ordering principles. On the contrary, theordering principles are very strict. The most importantamong these is convention. Though the casual spectatormay not notice, every tribal performance and creation has,at its back, another such performance or creation belonging
to a previous occasion. The creativity of the tribal artistlies in adhering to the past while, at the same time, slightlysubverting it. The subversions are more playful than ironic.Indeed, playfulness is the soul of tribal arts. Thoughoral and pictorial tribal art creations are intimately relatedto ritualsŠthe sacred can never be left outŠthe tribal arts
rarely assume a serious or pretentious tone. The artistrarely plays the role of the Creator. Listening to tribal epics
can be great fun as even the heroes are not spared theoccasional shock of the artist™s humour. One reason for
this unique mixture of the sacred and the ordinary may be
that tribal works of art are not created specifically for sale.Artists do expect a certain amount of patronage from thecommunity, like artists in any other context; but, since
those performing rituals are very often artists themselves,there is no element of competition in the patron-artistrelationship. The tribal arts are, therefore, relaxed, nevertense... One question invariably asked about the tribal artsis whether they are staticŠfrozen in traditionŠ or dynamic.A general misconception is that the orally transmitted arts
are entirely tradition-bound, with little scope for individualexperimentation beyond the small freedom to distort thepreviously created text. This misconception arises from the
habit of seeing art only with reference to the text but the tribalarts involve not just text but performance and audiencereception. Experimentation in the tribal arts can be understood
only when they are approached as performing arts.Non-tribals usually fail to notice that all of India™s tribalcommunities are basically bilingual. All bilingual
Tribal Verse
167communities have an innate capacity to assimilate outsideinfluences and, in this case, a highly evolved mechanism
for responding to the non-tribal world. The tribal oral storiesand songs employ bilingualism in such a complex mannerthat a linguist who is not alert to this complexity is in
danger of dismissing the tribal languages altogether asdialects of India™s major tongues...The language into which the works have beentranslated, English, carries massive colonial baggage. When
the works of contemporary Indian writersŠwho inherit amultilingual tradition several thousand years oldŠwere
classified as ‚new literature™, Western academics had no
idea how comical this classification looked to the literarycommunity in India. Hence it is neccessary to assert thatthe literature of the adivasis is not a new ‚movement™ or afresh ‚trend™ in the field of literature; most people havesimply been unaware of its existence and that is not the
fault of the tribals themselves. What might be new is thepresent attempt to see imaginative expression in triballanguage not as ‚folklore™ but as literature and to hear tribalspeech not as a dialect but as a language. This attitudemay be somewhat unconventional but only until we recall
that scripts themselves are relatively new, and that theprinting of literary text goes no further back than a fewcenturiesŠin comparison with creative experiments with
the human ability to produce speech in such a way that it
168Woven Words
transcends time. In fact, every written piece of literaturecontains substantial layers of orality. This is particularly
true for poetry and drama but, even in prose fiction, theelements of orality need to be significant if the work is tobe effective.1.    A MUNDA SONG: SONG OF BIRTH AND DEATHMy mother, the sun rose
A son was born.
My mother, the moon rose
A daughter was born.A son was born
The cowshed was depleted;A daughter was bornThe cowshed filled up.(Translated from the original Mundari)Note on the Munda Tribe
The Munda tribals live in parts of Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Assam, Tripura, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. They
are also known as Horohon or Mura, meaning headman of avillage. One of the most studied tribal communities of India,they also have an encyclopaedia on them, EncyclopaediaMundarica (16 Volumes) by Reverend John Baptist Hoffman
(1857Œ1928) and other Jesuit scholars.The Munda are probably the first of the adivasis toresist colonialism and they revolted repeatedly over agrarianissues. The Tamar insurrection of 1819Œ20 protestedagainst the break-up of their agrarian system. In their questto establish Munda Raj and reform their society to enable
it to cope with the challenges of time, they organised thefamous millennial movement under Birsa Munda (1874Œ1901) where their leaders used ‚both Hindu and Christian
idioms to create a Munda ideology and worldview™. However,
the uprising was quelled by the British.Note on the Munda SongMany ceremonies and rituals of the Munda areassociated with birth, death and marriage. Living in close
Tribal Verse
169harmony with nature, their lives are synchronisedwith the changing rhythms of nature, the
seasons, the rising and setting of the sun and soon, and not by clock time. The selected Mundasong is sung to rhythmic folk tunes at the birth
of a son or daughter and invariably communicatestheir close association with nature. Cattle set offto the pastures in the morning and return totheir sheds at sundown. The birth of a daughteris associated with a cowshed full of cows andthat of the son with its depletion. Clearly the
daughter is considered to be a more precious assetthan the son. This is probably because, in Mundasociety, the women have a dominant role to playin the various economic, social and ritualactivities.2.    A KONDH SONGThis we offer to you.We can,
Because we are still alive;If not,How could we offer at all,
And what ?We give a small baby fowl.
Take this and go awayWhichever way you came.Go back, return.Don™t inflict pain on us
After your departure.(Translated from the original Kondh)A note on the Kondh Tribe
The term ‚Kondh™ is most probably derivedfrom the Dravidian word, konda, meaning hill.Divided into several segments and distributedover the districts of Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh,Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa, thesehill people speak the Kondh language though
170Woven Words
most of them are bilingual and so conversantwith the major language of the state to which
they belong.The Kondh religion is a mixture of thetraditional faith of the adivasis and Hinduism.They do not have any dowry system but they dofix a bride price that the groom pays to the brideeither in cash or in kind.A Note on the Kondh SongThe Kondhs observe a number of rituals inconnection with birth, puberty, marriage anddeath, with specific folk dances and songs foreach occasion. They believe in the existence ofgods and spirits, both benevolent and malevolent.The song here is sung at the death of a personbeseeching the spirit of the dead to stop troubling
the living. It is based on the Kondh belief that
people love their homes so much that their soulsare reluctant to leave the hearth even after death.These spirits, though generally kind, can becomeharmful at times since they are now unable toparticipate in earthly life. It is, therefore,
customary to make generous offerings to thespirit. The song begins by saying that the deadspirit will be able to receive offerings only if the
others in the family continue to live and prosper.
They reveal their willingness to do anything tomake the spirit happy but, in return, the spiritmust also promise not to trouble them with itsvisits.3.    ADI SONG FOR THE RECOVERY OF LOST HEALTHOh my beloved oneIf you lost your health due to ill luckI come forward here to save youWith this EmulTo call back your lost health.Listen to the sound of this sweet ornament
Tribal Verse
171And follow me to your sweet home.I tie this Ridin creeper
To fasten your soul to your body.Follow the footprint of this cockCome, come with me to your home.(Translated from the original Miri Agom)A Note on the Adi Tribe
Adi is a generic term denoting hill people and it includesa number of groups. It may be applied to all the hill tribesaround the Brahmaputra valley. The Adi are, however,
concentrated in the East and West Siang district of

Arunachal Pradesh. They belive that every object in theuniverse, be it human beings, animals, trees or birds, havea spirit that needs to be nourished and propitiated.Dependent on nature for many of their needs, they believethat equilibrium in nature must always be maintained.Even though hunting is considered not just a means of
procuring food but also an expression of courage and skill,they still believe that human beings must hunt for survivaland not for greed.The Adi have two major languages that they use fortwo different purposes. The language for routineconversation is called Adi Agom. The second major languagestill in use is Miri Agom, a highly rhythmic language usedfor chanting during their rituals. The headman of the village
is generally the best hunter as well as an expert in MiriAgom. Both languages are living languages and rituals andceremonies provide the occasion for the teaching of MiriAgom to the younger generation.A Note on the Adi SongThe song selected here is actually a mantra that ischanted in Miri Agom to lure the spirit of good health backto the body of a sick person. The Adi believe that a personfalls ill when the spirit of good health abandons the body
due to some shock it may suffer. The above lines are chanted
in a ritual performed by the maternal uncle of the sickperson.
172Woven Words
NotesBeloved one: the loved nephew or niece who is ill.I come forward here to save you: the maternal uncle of thesick person comes forward to perform the ritual for the return of thespirit of good health.Emul: amulet, here a healing ornament.Listen to the sound of this ornament: this line and the onesthat follow are addressed to the spirit of good health to request it to
return to the ill body.Your sweet home: 
the ill body which is the real home of the
spirit of good health.Ridin: a creeper that is supposed to have special medicinalqualities.Fasten your soul to your body: the Ridin creeper will tie thespirit of good health to the body to ensure its continued presence.Follow the footprints of this cock: usually an offering like acock or a hen is made to propitiate the spirit of good health and
presuade it to return to the ill body.ABOUT THE AUTHORG.N. Devy, formerly professor of English at Maharaja SayajiRao University of Baroda, is the Founder Director of theTribal Academy at Tejgarh, Gujarat. He is the Director ofSahitya Akademi™s Project on Literature in Tribal Languagesand Oral Traditions. He received the Sahitya Akademi Awardfor his book After Amnesia and the SAARC Writer™s
Foundation Award for his work on the ‚denotified tribes™.UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT1.Identify the common characteristics shared by tribal
communities all over the world.2.What distinguishes the tribal imagination from the secular
imagination?3.How does G.N. Devy bring out the importance of the oral literary
tradition?4.List the distinctive features of the tribal arts.
5.‚New literature™ is a misnomer for the wealth of the Indian literary
tradition. How does G.N. Devy explain this?

Tribal Verse
173TALKING ABOUT THE TEXTDiscuss the following in pairs or in groups of four1.‚It is time to realise that unless we modify the established notion
of literature as something written, we will silently witness thedecline of various Indian oral traditions.™2.‚Tribal arts are not specificlly meant for sale.™ Does this help or
hamper their growth and preservation?3.Because India™s tribal communities are basically bilingual there
is a danger of dismissing their languages as dialects of India™smajor tongues.4.While tribal communities may not seem to possess the scientific
temper, there are many ideas from tribal conventions that could

enrich modern societies.APPRECIATION1.How does ‚A Munda Song™ show that the perspective of the tribal
mind towards the girl child is different from that of (other)mainstream communities?2.How does ‚A Kondh Song™ substantiate the tribal urge to gain
domination over time by conversing with their dead ancestors?3.‚Adi Song for the Recovery of Lost Health™ is in 
Miri Agom whileAdi Agom is the Adi community™s language for routineconversation. How does this reflect upon the high level oflanguage sensitivity of the Adi? Can you think of other  parallels
in modern languages between the literary variety and the
colloquial variety?LANGUAGE WORK1.Comment on the symbols used in ‚A Munda Song™. What aspect
of the tribal worldview do they reflect?2.Explain the significance of the lines
‚I tie this Ridin creeperTo fasten your soul to your body.™3.What is the central argument of the speaker?
SUGGESTED READING1.Cultural Diversity, Linguistic Plurality and Literary Traditions in
India, ed. Sukinta Paul Kumar, for University of Delhi.

